S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
137 
SHRI B. P. HIRA, WORKS MANAGER, 
CENTRAL RAILWAY, PAREL, BOMBAY E1:C. 
v. 
SHRI C. M. PRADHAN ETC. 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR and 
K. N. W ANCHOO, JJ.) 
Overtime Wages-Claim by employees in railway factory-
Validity-F actories Act, z948 (LXIII of z948), ss. z(l), 59-The 
Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, z948 (Bom. 79 of z948). 
SS, 4, 70. 
These appeals by special leave arose from applications made 
by the respondents, who were employed as timekeepers in the 
time office of the Central Railway Workshop and Factory, Parel, 
Bombay, claiming payment of overtime wages under the Payment 
of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). The case of the respondents was 
that they were workers within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (LXIII of 1948) and as such were entitled 
to overtime wages under s. 59 of the said Act. Alternatively, 
they urged that even if they. were not workers within the mean. 
ing of s. 2(1) of the said Act, they would nevertheless be entitled 
to overtime wages under the s. 59 by reason of s. 70 of .the 
Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948 (Born. 79 of 1948). 
The validity of the claim on both the grounds was disputed by 
the appellant. The Authority under the Payment of Wages Act 
found that only four of the respondents, who were required to do 
the work of progress timekeepers, could claim the status of 
workers within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the Factories Act and 
the rest were merely employees of the workshop, but the 
Authority accepted the alternative case made by the respond-
ents and directed the appellant to file a statement showing the 
overtime wages due to each of the respondents and ordered it to 
pay the same. 
Held, that the Authority was right in the view that fr took 
of s. 70 of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948, and 
its decision must be affirmed. 
On a proper construction of s. 70 of the Act it is clear that 
the first part of the section excludes a factory and its employees 
from the operation of the Act ; but the second part makes the 
relevant provisions of the Factories Act applicable to them. The 
non-obstante clause in the section shows that the employees in a 
factory, although they might not be workers within the meaning 
of s. 2(1) of the Factories Act, are entitled to claim overtime 
wages as provided for by that Act. 
It is not correct to say that s. 4 of the Bombay Shops and 
Establishments Act, 1948, has the effect of excluding the opera-
tion of s. 70 of the Act. Section 4 applies only to establish· 
ments and not to factories; but even if it applied, to factories 
18 
z959 
Moy 8. 
Z9$9 
B. P. Hira 
v. 
C. M. PradhaH 
138 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
that cannot materially affect the application of s. 70 which is 
intended to operate not withstanding the other provisions of the 
Act. 
Consistently with its policy, the Act, which provides for 
overtime wages for employees in all establishments, provides for 
overtime wages for employees in factories as well by making the 
relevant provisions of the Factories Act applicable to them. 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeals Nos. 
131 to 304 of 1957. 
Appeals by special leave from the judgments and 
order dated October 19, 1955 and January 31, 1956, of 
the Authority under Payment of Wages Act, Bombay, 
in Applications Nos. 950-961, 963-967, 970-989, 992, 
994-1013, 1015-1016, 1049-1050 and 11510-11511 and 
11513-11517 of 1955 respectively. 
M.G. Setalvad, Attorney-General for India, R. Gana-
pathy Iyer and R.H. Dhebar, for the appellants. 
Purshottam Tricumdas and 0. N. Srivastava, for the 
respondents in all the appeals except C. A. No. 186 
of 1957. 
1959. May 8. The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by 
Gaj.,.dragadkar J. 
GAJENDRAGADKAR J.-This group of 174 appeals by. 
special leave arises from the several applications made 
against Mr. B. P. Hira, Works Manager, Central Rail-
way Workshop and Factory, Pa.rel, Bombay (hereafter 
called the appellant) by the employees at the said 
factory (hereafter called the respondents) under the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (IV of 1936) claiming 
payment of overtime wages since 1948. All these 
applications were heard by the Payment of Wages 
Authority, Bombay, as companion matters and they 
have been disposed of by a common judgment. The 
main judgment has, however, been delivered by the 
said Authority in the application filed by Mr. C. M. 
Pradhan (hereafter called the respondent) which gives 
rise to Civil Appeal No. 131 of 1957 before us. We 
would, therefore, deal with this appeal in particular 
and our decision in this appeal will govern the rest of 
the appeals in this group. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
139 
In his application made before the Payment of 
I959 
W a.ges Authority the respondent alleged that h~ had 
been employed in the factory called the Central Rail-
B. P~.Hir• 
way Workshop and Factory, Pa.rel, Bombay, and tha.t c. M. Prlld"'1,. 
he had not been paid overtime wages due to him from 
April 1, 1949, to September 30, 1954. The respondent Gajn4ra11SdkM J. 
claimed that the delay made by him in filing the 
present application should be condoned because jointly 
with his co-workers he had been in correspondence 
with the railway administration in regard to the sa.id 
payment of overtime wages since 1948 and that the 
claim ma.de by him and his colleagues had been finally 
rejected by the railway administration on August 31, 
1954. His case was that he had filed the present applic-
ation soon thereafter and so the delay made by him 
in making the claim before the Authority , should be 
condoned. The Authority heard the parties on the 
question of delay and held that the delay only in re,s-
pect of the claim for the period after May 1953 should 
be condoned. · In the result the claim for overtime 
wages for the period prior to May 19, 1953, was rejected 
on the preliminary ground of delay whereas the claim 
for the period subsequent to the sa.id da.te wa.s con-
sidered on the merits.• 
The respondent's ca.se wa.s that he was entitled to 
the overtime wages for work on such Sundays when 
he was not given a holiday within three da.ys prior to 
or three da.ys subsequent to the Sundays on which he 
worked. The appellant conceded that the respondent 
had not been given a. holiday within the three days 
prior to or the three da.ys subsequent to the Sundays 
on which he had worked as required by s. 52 of the 
Indian Factories Act. The respondent alleged tha.t he 
wa.s a. worker within the meaning of s. 2, sub-s. (1) of 
the said Factories Act (LXIII of 1948) and &f! such he 
wa.s entitled to overtime wages under s 59 of the said 
Act. Alternatively he urged that even if he wa.s not a 
worker within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the sa.id Act, 
he would neverthless be entitled to overtime wages 
under the said s. 59 by reason of s. 70 of the Bombay 
Shops and Establishments Act, 1948 (Bom. 79 of 1948) 
(hereafter called the Act). 
Thus the claim for. 
140 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
(1960(1)] 
z959 
overtime wages was made by the respondent on two 
alternative grounds. 
B. P~.Hir• 
The appellant disputed the validity of this claim. 
c. M. Prod/Jan It was urged on its behalf that the respondent was not 
a worker under s. 2(1) of the ]'actories Act and that 
Gojm4ro1•dk•r J. s. 70 of the Act did not justfy the claim alternatively 
made by the respondent for overtime wages. 
The Authority considered the evidence led before it 
in respect of all the repondents for overtime wages. It 
appears that these respondents are employed by the 
appellant in the time office of the Pare! Workshop and 
not in the factory itself. The duties of these time-
keepers are to maintain initial records of attendance 
of workshop staff, to prepare pay-sheets for them to 
maintain their leave accounts, to dispose of final settle-
ment cases of the said staff and to maintain records 
for satistical information. The Authority held that 
the time office where the timekeepers work is an integ-
ral part of the factory and so it came to the conclusion 
that the timekeepers are employed in the factory called 
the Central Railway Workshop and Factory, Parel, 
Bombay. 
The Authority then examined. the question as to 
whether the timekeepers are workers within the mean-
ing of s. 2(1) of the Factories Act. Evidence showed 
that four timekeepers, are required to do the work of 
progress timekeepers. This work consists in preparing 
the progress time-sheets and operation time-sheets of 
machine-shop staff working on various jobs dealing with 
the production of railway spare parts. The Allthority 
was disposed to take the view that having regard to 
the nature of the work assigned to the progress time-
keepers they must be held to be persons employed in 
work incidental to, or connected with the manufac-
turing process or the subject of the manufacturing 
process and as such they are workers within the mean-
ing of s. 2(1) of the Factories Act. In the result, the 
finding made by the Authority was that timekeepers 
are employees of the workshop, but are not workers 
under the Factories Act ; while the progress time-
keepers can claim the status of workers under the 
said Act. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
141 
The Authority then considered the respondent's 
z959 
argument that even if he was not a worker under the 
B 
. 
• P. H.,a 
Factories Act he was neverthless entitled to claim 
v. 
the benefit of s. 59 of the said Act by virtue of s. 70 c. M. Pradharl 
of the Act. The Authority accepted this contention 
. -
and held that, even if the respondent was not a. Ga1enaragadkar J. 
worker under the Factories Act, s. 70 of the Act 
entitled him to claim overtime wages under s. 59 
of the Factories Act. That is why the Authority 
orslered that the respondents would be entitled 
fdr the period 19-5-1953 to 30-9-1954 to overtime 
wages at double the ordinary rate for the Sundays 
on which they worked when they were not given a 
a holiday on one of the three days immediately 
preceding or after the said Sunday. The appellant 
was accordingly directed to file a statement showing 
the overtime wages to which the several respondents 
were entitled and orders were passed on each one of 
the applications directing the appellant to pay the 
respective amounts to each one of the respondents. 
It is against these orders that the appellant has filed 
the present group of appeals by special leave. 
The first point which has been urged before us by 
the learned Attorney-General on behalf of the appel-
lant is that the Authority was in error in holding that 
the progress timekeepers are workers under s. 2(1) of 
the Factories Act. A worker under s. 2(1) means a 
person employed directly or through any agency, 
whether for wages or not, in any manufacturing pro-
cess, or in cleaning any part of the machinery or 
premises used for manufacturing process, or in any 
other kind of work incidental to, or connected with, 
the manufacturing process, or the subject of the 
manufacturing process; and the manufacturing pro-
cess under s. 2(k) means any process for inter alia (1) 
making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, 
packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, 
breaking-up, 
demolishing or otherwise treating or adapting any 
article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
transport, delivery or disposal. It is clear that the 
duties of the progress timekeepers do not fall within 
the first pa.rt of s. 2(k). The Authority has however, 
142 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
z959 
held that the said duties can be treated as incidental 
to, or connected with, the manufacturing process or 
B. P~.Hira 
the subject of manufacturing process; it is the 
c. M. Pradhan correctness of this finding that is challenged by the 
appellant. 
Gaj""1raga4har J. 
On the other hand, Mr. Purshottam, for the res-
pondents, argues that the Authority was in error 
in holding that the timekeepers are not workers under 
s. 2 (1). 
His contention is that the expression 
"incidental to, or connected with, the manufacturing 
process" is wide enough to include not only the cases 
of the progress timekeepers but the cases of all time-
keepers as a class. It is true that the finding of the 
Authority in respect of the timekeepers is against the 
respondents; but Mr. Purshottam says that he is 
entitled to support the final order passed by the 
Authority on the additional ground that the time-
keepers, like the progress timekeepers, are workers 
under s. 2(1) and as such they are entitled to claim 
overtime wages under s. 59 of the Factories Act. 
The final decision of the Authority is, however, 
based on the view that under s. 70 of the Act the 
respondents would be entitled to overtime wages 
under s. 59 of the Factories Act even if they are not 
workers under s. 2(1). That being so, we think it is 
necessary first to consider the correctness of this view. 
If the conclusion of the Authority on the scop_e and 
effect of the provisions of s. 70 of the Act is correct, 
then it would be unnecessary to consider whether the 
timekeepers and the progress timekeepers are workers 
under s. 2(1) of the Factories Act. We would, there-
fore, deal with that question first. 
It appears that there are three statutes which pro-
vide for the payment of extra. wages for overtime 
work. The proviso to s. 71 (c) of the Indian Railways 
Act (IX of 1890) lays down that the exempted railway 
servant specified in it shall be pa.id for overtime at 
not less than one and a quarter times his ordinary 
rate of pay. This provision has been subsequently 
amended by Act 59of1956, which makes the rate for 
overtime one and one-half times the ordinary rate 
of pay ; but it is common ground that we are not 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
143 
concerned with the a.mended provision in these appeals 
z959 
since the respondents' claim is for a period prior to 
I . 
d b 
h 
B. P. Hir11 
the date of the amendment. 
t is suggeste 
y t e 
v. 
appellant that the respondents are railway servants c. M. Pradhlln 
under s. 3 (7) of the said Act, and as such they may 
--
be entitled to make a. claim for overtime wages under Gajendragadkar J. 
the said proviso ; but the respondents have not made, 
and do not wish to make, a claim under the said 
provision; and so the question as to the application 
of the said section need not detain us. If the con-
struction placed on s. 70 of the Act by the Authority 
is cor.rect, the claims of employees who are working in 
a. factory in the State of Bombay would be governed 
by that provision; this position is not seriously dis-
puted before us. 
Section 59 of the Factories Act also deals with the 
question of extra. wages for overtime. It provides 
for the payment of wages in respect of overtime work 
at the rate of twice the ordinary rate of wages. This 
benefit is, however, available only to persons who a.re 
workers within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the said Act 
Since we are dealing with the ca.se on the assumption 
that the respondents are not workers under s. 2(1) it 
follows that s. 59 by itself would not be applicable 
to them. 
The Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948, 
is the third statute which makes a. provision for the 
payment of extra wages for overtime work. Section 
63 of the Act deals with this topic ... Section 63(1) 
provides for the payment of overtime work at the 
rate of H times the ordinary rate of w~ges in the 
case of employees in any establishment other than a 
residential hotel, restaurant, or eating-house, whereas 
sub-s. (2) provides for wages for overtime at the rate 
of twice the ordinary rate of wages in respect of 
employees in a residential hotel, restaurant or eating-
house, subject to the other conditions specified in the 
said section. It is clear that this section does not 
apply to the respondents because they are employees 
in a. factory and not in any of the establishments 
enumerated in its two sub-sections. 
144 
SUPREM~ COURT REPORTS (1960(1)] 
z959 
The respondents' case, however, is that by virtue of 
s. 70 of the Act the provisions of the Factories Act, 
B. P~.HiY• 
including s. 59, are extended to the cases of all em-
c. M. Pradhan ployees in factories, and so they are entitled to claim 
-
wages for overtime under the said section of the 
Gajendragadkar J. Factories Act. This contention has been upheld by 
the Authority. It is not disputed by the appellant 
that the Bombay Legislature was competent to 
prescribe for the extension of the provisions of the 
Factories Act to employees in the factories within the 
territory of the State of Bombay; and since sanction 
for this legislation has been duly obtained from the 
Governor-General of India on January 3, 1949('), no 
question about ll.ny repugnance between the provi-
sions of s. 70 and those of the Factories Act can pos-
sibly a.rise. Thus the validity of the said section is not 
in dispute; and so the only point which calls for our 
decision is one of construction: Does s. 70 supplement 
the provisions of the Factories Act by extending them 
to all employees in factories like the respondents 
though they are not workers under s. 2(1) of the 
said Act? 
Before dealing with this point it is necessary to 
refer briefly to the broad features of the Act. The 
Act no doubt is a piece of beneficent social legislation 
intended to serve the cause of labour welfare. It has 
been passed in order to consolidate and amend the 
law relating to the regulat.ion and conditions of work 
and employment in shops, commercial establishments, 
residential hotels, restaurants, eating-houses, theatres, 
other places of public amusements and entertainments 
and other establishments. Section 2, sub-ss. (3), (4) 
and {27) define respectivly the establishment, commer-
cial establishment and shop. The definitions of com-
mercial establishment and shop exclude inter alia 
factory. 
Establishment is defind as meaning a shop, 
commercial establishment, residential hotel, restaurant, 
eating-house, theatre or other place of public amuse-
ment are entertainment to which the Act applies and 
includes such other establishment as the State Govern-
ment may by notification in the official gazette declare 
(I) Published 
in the Bombay Government 
Gazette, Part 
IV. 
dated 11·1·1949. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REJ:>OH.TS 
145 
to be an establishment for the purposes of this Act. 
It would be noticed that the definition of establishment 
I959 
B. 'P. Hira 
is very wide, and it does not purport to be exhaustive 
v. 
because it expressly empowers the State Government c. M. Pradhan 
to include within its purview by notification other . . 
-
establishments not specified in it. Section 2, sub-s. (6) Ga1endragadliar J. 
defines an employee as meaning a person wholly or 
principally employed in, and in connection with, any 
establishment, and includes an apprentice hut does 
not include a member of the employer's family. 
'.fhis 
definition shows that the Act intends to confer the 
benefit of its provision on all persons who fall within 
the wide definition of the expression" Employee". 
It is necessary at this stage to refer to the definition 
of " factory " under the Act. Section 2(9) defines a 
factory as meaning any premises which is a factory 
within the meaning of cl. (m) of s. 2 of the ]'actories 
.A,ct or which is deemed to be a factory under s. 85 of 
the said Act. 
Nows. 2(m) of the Factories Act defines a factory as 
meaning any premises including the precincts thereof-
" (i) whereon ten or more workers are working, 
or were working on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on with the 
aid of power, or is ordinarily so carried on, or 
(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, 
or were working on aiiy day of the preceding twelve 
months, and in any part of which a manufacturing 
process is being carried on without the aid of power, 
or is ordinarily so carried on,-
but does not include a mine subject to the opera-
tion of the Mines Act, 1952 (XXXV of 1952), or a 
railway running shed;" 
ands. 85 confers authori'.y on the State Government 
to extend the definition of factory to other places 
subject to the requirements specified in the said section. 
It is common ground that the place where the respon-
dents are employed is a factory under s. 2(m) of the 
}i'actories Act, and so it satisfies the defiuition of s. 2(9) 
of the Act. 
19 
146 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
z95o 
The scheme of the Act shows that it deals separately 
with shops and commercial establishments (ch. III), 
n. P~.Hfra 
residential hotels, restaurants and eating-houses (ch. 
c. M. Pradhan IV) and theatres and other places of public amusement 
(ch. V). 
Separate provisions are made to regulate 
Gajendragadkar J. these different establishments having regard to the 
special needs of each one of them. There are, however, 
general provisions applicable to and regulating all the 
establishments alike and these are found in chs. VI to 
IX. It is significant that with the exception of s. 70, 
no other section of the Act deals with factories. 
We have already noticed that in defining "com-
mercial establishment" and "shop " respectively the 
Act has expressly excluded " factories " from the said 
expressions. It is true that the definition of "establish-
ment" does not expressly exclude factory ; but it is 
plain that factory is treated by the Act as separate and 
distinct and there can be no doubt that the provisions 
in the Act which apply to establishment are not 
intended to, and do not, apply to factories. In other 
words, though the definition of " establishmept" is 
wide enough, it does not include factory for the pur-
poses of the Act. It is conceivable that a kitchen 
attached to an establishment like a residential hotel 
may satisfy the definition of factory ; but it seems to 
us that such an adjunct of an establishment is prima 
facie not intended by the Act to be treated apart and 
separately from the main establishment itself; and so 
it would be taken as a part of the establishment and 
be governed by the provisions of the Act in relation 
thereto. 
The factory where the respondents are 
employed is not connected with, much less an insepar-
able adjunct of, any establishment, and so this aca-
demic aspect of the matter which was incidentally posed 
before us by the learned Attorney-General need not be 
pursued any further in the present appeal. 
The conclusion of the Authority has been challenged 
by the appellant on the ground that s. 70 on which it 
is based cannot be invoked by the respondents. In 
support of this argument reliance is placed on s. 4 of 
the Act. 
Section 4 provides that notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Act its provisions mentioned 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COUR'l' REPORTS 
147 
in the third column of sch. II shall not apply to 
z959 
the establishments, employees and other persons men-
h 
d 
1 
f h 
'd 
B. P. Hira 
tioncd against them in t e secon 
co mun o t e sai 
v. 
schedule. The proviso to this section authorises the c. M. Pradhan 
State Government to add to, omit or alter any of the 
entries in the said schedule in the manner indicated Gajentlragatlkar J. 
by it. It is urged that the establishment of any rail-
way administration is mentioned as sr. no. 5 in sch. 
II and the entry against it in col. 3 of the said schedule 
shows that the provisions of the Act are inapplicable 
to the said establishments. If the establishment in 
question is exempted from the application of all the 
provisions of the Act, how can s. 70 be said to apply 
to it? asks the learned Attorney-General. lt is obvious 
thats. 4 mentions and applies only to establishments 
and it has no application to factories ; and we are 
dealing with employees in a factory. Indeed as we 
have already observed, no provision of the Act except 
s. 70 applies to factories and so it would not be legiti-
mate to base any argument on the assumption that 
s. 4 is applioable to the present case. 
Incidentally the learned Attorney-General suggested, 
though faintly, that the establishments mentioned at 
sr. nos. 1 to 6 in col. 2 of sch. II are wider than and 
different from the establishment as defined by s. 2(8). 
We do not think that this suggestion is well-founded. 
There can be no doubt thats. 4 grants exemptions to 
the said establishments from the application of the 
provisions mentioned in col. 3 of sch. II ; and that 
itself postulates that but for the exemption thus 
granted the provisions of the Act would have applied 
to them. Indeed the scheme of sch. II shows that 
whereas all the provisions of the Act are made inapplic-
able to the establishments and offices enumerated at 
sr. nos. 1 to 6 including 6(a) to 6(k), in regard to the 
others which are enumerated at sr. nos. 7 to 55 it is 
only some provisions of the Act specified in col. 3 that 
are excluded. In other words, the remaining sections 
not so specified would apply to them. If that is so, 
they must be and are establishments under s. 2(8) of 
the Act. 
148 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
1 959 
In this connection it must be borne in mind that 
s. 2(8) empowers the State Government to include by 
B. P ~.Hira 
notification any office or institution within the defini-
c. M. Pradhan tion of establishment; and so the inclusion of any such 
office or institution in col. 2 of sch. II would make it 
Gajcndragadkar J. an establishment under the Act, and as such it would 
be governed by it subject of course to the correspond-
ing entry in col. 3. That is why we think that the 
suggestion of the leafrned Attorney-General as to the 
denotation and character of establishments enumerat-
ed in sr. nos. 1 to 5 in col. 2 of sch. II cannot be 
accepted. All the offices, establishments and other 
institutions mentioned in col. 2 of sch. II are and must 
be held to be establishments under s. 2(8). 
In regard to the argument that the. operation of 
s. 4 excludes the application of s. 70 we have held that 
s. 4 applies only to establishments and not to factories. 
But even ifs. 4 is assumed to be applicable to factories, 
we do not think it would materially affect the applica-
tion of s. 70. 
The plain object underlying s. 70 and 
its context emphatically point out that it is intended 
to operate independently of the other provisions of the 
Act and in that sense it stands apart from them. It is 
this aspect of the matter which is clarified by the 
Legislature by laying down in s. 70 that nothing in the 
Act shall be deemed to apply to any persons employed 
in the factory. That, however, anticipates the argu-
ment on the construction of s. 70. 
Let us therefore, 
cite the said section and construe it. 
Section 70 provides that nothing in this Act shall be 
deemed to apply to any person employed in or within 
the precincts of a factory and the provisions of the 
Factories Act shall, notwithstanding anything in the 
said Act, apply to such person. This section consists 
of two .parts. The first part makes it clear that no 
provision in the Act shall be deemed to apply to the 
persons specified in it. The Legislature knew that in 
fact the Act contained no provision which in terms or 
expressly applies to any such person; but in order to 
remove any possible doubt it has provided that no 
provision in the Act shall even by inference or fiction 
be deemed to apply to them. In other words this clause 
.. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
149 
I959 
is intended to clarify the position that though factory 
has been defined by s. 2(9) of the Act, no provision of 
A 
d 
B.P.Hira 
the 
ct is inten ed to be applied to a. factory or 
v. 
employees in it. Having clarified this position the c. M. Pradhan' 
second part of the section extends the application of . --
the Factories Act to the said persons. 
Ga1endragadkar J. 
It would have been possible for the Legislature to 
include in the present statute a.11 the relevant provisions 
of the Factories Act and make them applicable to 
factories as defined by s. 2(9); but apparently the 
Legislature thought that the same object can be 
achieved by enacting the second part of s. 70. This 
part provides that the provisions of the Factories Act 
shall a.pply to the persons in question notwithstanding 
anything contained in the said Act. The said Act 
contalns the provision by which workers are defined 
under s. 2(1), and it necessarily involves the conse-
querue that the relevant provision about the payment 
of o>ertime wages applies only to workers as defined 
and not to employees in factories who are not workers. 
It is in reference to this provision that s. 70 has provi-
ded t.liat notwithstanding the said provision the relevant 
provsions of the Factories Act will apply to persons 
employed in a factory. The non-obstante clause in 
s. 7( thus serves the purpose of clarifying the position 
thatthe Factories Act is made applicable to employees 
in factories and that they are not governed by any of 
the Jrovisions of the Act. This conclusion is. obviously 
comi.stent with the policy of the Act. It has itself 
macb provision for the payment of overtime wages to 
empoyees in all establishments by s. 63 ; and it has 
made applicable inter alia the relevant provisions of 
the 1actories Act in regard to employees in factories. 
Tha1 is the view which the Authority has taken, and 
in 01r opinion its validity or correctness is not open to 
doult. 
Inthe result the orders passed by the authority are 
confiomed and the appeals are dismissed with costs in 
one set. 
Appeals dismissed. 
