1950 
Patntalal 
Jankid-:u 
v, 
Mohanlal and 
Another, 
Pata1tjali 
S11stri J. 
!950 
Deo, 21. 
1008 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950] 
of section 14, it seems to me, they would be bringing 
themselves under the bar of section 18 (2). 
The 
respondents cannot therefore claim that the loss of the 
goods was explosion damage within the meaning of the 
Ordinance so as to bring the case within section 14 and 
at the same time contend that the loss was not "due 
to or did not in any way arise ont of the explosion" in 
order to a void the bar under section 18. 
Both sec-
tion 14 and section 18 have in view the physical cause 
for the loss or damage to property for which compen-
sation is claimed and not the cause of action in rela-
tion to the person against whom relief is sought. The 
respondents cannot, in my opinion, be allowed to take 
up inconsistent positions in order to bring themselves 
within the one and to get out of the other. 
I would therefore allow the appeal and dismiss the 
counter-claim. 
DAS J. agreed with the Chief Justice. 
Appeal dismissed. 
Agent for the appellants: Mohan Behari Lal. 
Agent for the respondents : I. N. Shroff. 
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, 
WEST BENGAL 
v. 
CALCUTTA AGENCY LTD. 
[SHRI HARILAL KANIA CJ., PATANJAL! SASTRI 
and DAS JJ.] 
fo·li.tn Income-tax Act (XI of 1922), ss. 10 (2) (xv), 66-Refer-
ence-Jwrisdiction of High Ooilf·t-Duty to decide case ori facts 
stated by Tribuna.l-Accepting arauments of CO'ltnsel as proved fa.cts 
and basing decision on them, impropriety of-Business expenditnre-
Payments to avoid disclosure of misfeasance of director.~-Burden of 
prcof. 
The jurisdiction of the High Court in the matter of income-
tax references is an advisory jurisdiction and under the Inco:ne-
tax Act the decision of the Appellate Tribunal on facts is final 
unless it can be successfully assailed on the ground tha~ there was 
,_ 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
1009 
no evidence for the conclusions on facts recorded by the Tribnnal. 
1950 
It is therefore the duty of the High Court to start by looking at 
tbe facts found by the Tribunal and ans~'e!: the questions of lHW Cornmiss:oritr of 
on that footing. 
It is not p1·oper to depart fron1 this rule of law 
Incnme-tax, 
as it will convert the High Court into a fact finding authority, 
Wcst Bengal 
which it is not, under the advisory jurisdiction. 
v. 
As the statement of the case prepared by the Appellate Tri· Calcutta Ag•ncy 
bunal in accordance v.'ith the rules fran1ed under the Income-tax 
Ltd. 
Act is prepared with the knowledge of the parties concerned and 
they have full opportunity to apply for any addition or deletion 
from that statement, if they have approved of the state1nent n1ade 
by the Tribunal, it iR the agreed etatement of facts by the parties 
on w bich the Iligh Court has to pronouncs its judgment. 
The 
High Court would be acting improperly if it takes the arguments 
of the counsel for the assessee as if they were facts and bases its 
conclusion on tboso arguments. 
One of the directors of the assessee company, acting in the 
capacity of managing agents of certain l\'fills, had dra\vn some 
hundis in the name of tho Mills, aod as the Mills repudiated lia-
bility, suits were filed on the hundis against the Mills and the 
assessees. The assessees thereupon agreed to reimburse the Mills 
by permitting the latter to deduct a moiety of the commission 
pa.yable to them under the agreement of managing agency, against 
payments which the Mills may have to make under the decrees. 
In their assessment fio income-tnx the assessees claimed that the 
amounts so deducted should bo excluded from their asRessable 
income as business cxpenditme under s. 10 (2) (xv) of tbe Income-
tax Act. 
The Appellate Tribunal found that the assessees had 
agreed to pay off the decree a1nount from the remuneration due to 
them, that the decre.e was passed against them evidently for some 
misfeasance committed by their directors, that the books of both 
companies showed that the assessees were paid their remunera-
tion in full, and that the expenditure was not therefore laid out 
for the purpose of carrying on the business, and also that, as the 
payment was made for the liquidation of a debt, it was not a 
revenue expenditure. In the High Court the assessees' counsel 
argued, relying on the case cf Mitchell v. B. W. Noble Ltd.(1), 
that the payments were made by th• assessees to avoid the 
publicity of an action against them and the consequent exposure 
and loss of reputation as a. managing agency company, and as 
such the payments were deductible as business expenditure. The 
High Court accepted this argument and reversed the decision of 
the Tribunal. 
Held, that the High Court acted wrongly in accepting the 
argurr1ents of the assessees' counsel as if they were proved facts 
and basing its decision on them ; and, as the facts necessary to 
support the claim for exemption under s. 10 (2) (xv) had not been 
established at any stage of the case, the assessees were not entitled 
to the deduction cJ.imed. 
(11 (1927] l K.B. 719, 
1~9 
• 
1010 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950) 
1950 
Judgment of the Calcutta High Court reversed. 
0 
. . 
/ 
APPELLATE JumsDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 59 of 
onimissioner o 
1"come-tax, 
1950. 
West Bengal 
Appeal from a Judgment of the High Court of Judi-
v. 
cature at Calcutta (Harries C.J. and Chatterjea J.) 
Galcu~~/Y'"'Y dated 9th Septern ber, 1949, in a reference under 
· 
section 66 (2) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. 
(Reference No. 8 of 1949). 
M. C. Setalvad, Attorney-General for India (G. N. 
] oshi, with him) for the appellant. 
S. Mitra (B. Banerjee, with him) for the respond-
ents. 
1950. December 21. The Judgment of the Court 
was delivered by 
Kan•a o. J. 
KANIA C.J.-This is an appeal from the judgment 
of the High Court at Calcutta (Harries C.J. and 
Chatterjea J.) pronounced on a reference made to it 
by the Income.tax Tribunal under section 66 (2) of 
the Indian Income.tax Act. 
The relevant facts are 
these. The respondents are a private limited company 
which was brought into existence to float various 
companies including cotton mills. In November, 1932, 
the Basanti Cotton Mills Ltd. was incorporated and 
the respondents were appointed their managing agents. 
Their remuneration was fixed at a monthly allowance 
of Rs. 500 and a commission of 3 per cent. on all gross 
sales of goods manufactured by the Mills Company. 
The fixed monthly allowance was liable to be increased 
in the event of the capital of the company being 
increased. The details are immaterial. lt appears 
that certain hundis were drawn by one of the directors 
of the respondent company, acting in the capacity of 
the managing agents of the :Mill Company, in the name 
of the Mill Company and the same were negotiated to 
others. The Nath Bank Ltd. claimed payment of 
these hundis. 
The Mill Company repudiated its 
liability as it appeared from the books of the Mill 
Company that they had not the use of the sum of 
Rs. 1.80,000 claimed by the Nath Bank Ltd. under 
the hundis. The Nath Bank Ltd. instituted four suits 
·I' 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
1011 
against the Mill Company, in two of which the res-
1950 
pondent company were party-defendants. The Mill Comm;:.;;;n.,· of 
Company was advised to settle the suits and the res-
Incom•·ta:r:. 
pondent company entered into an agreement with the w .. t Bengal 
Mill Company, the material part of the terms of which 
•. 
rnns as follows ·-
Calcutta Agency 
• 
Ltd. 
" Memorandum of Agreement made between the 
Calcutta Agency Limited of the one part and Basanti 
Kama c. J. 
Cotton Mills Ltd. of the other part. \;\/HEREAS the 
Nath Bank Limited demanded from the Mills the 
payment of the sum of Rs. 1,80,000 and interest there-
on AND WHEREAS the said Mills repudiated their 
liability in respect thereof as it appeared from the 
books of the said Mills that the said Mills did not have 
the use of the said sum of Rs. 1,80 000 or any part there-
of AND WHEREAS the said Nath Bank Ltd. there-
upon instituted four suits in High Court being suit 
Nos. 1683, 1720, 1735 and 1757 of 1939 for the said 
aggregate sum of Rs. 1,80,000 and the interest thereon 
AND WHEREAS the said Mills have been advised to 
settle the said suits amicably AND WHEREAS the 
Calcutta Agency Limited by its Directors, S.N. Mitter 
or S.C. Mitter, having been and being still the Manag-
ing Agents of the said Mills have undertaken to 
reimburse the said Mills in respect of the decrees to oe 
made in the said four suits in the manner hereinafter 
appearing NOW THESE PRESENTS WITNESS 
AND IT IS HEREBY AGREED AND DECLARED 
(i) That out of the commission of 3% payable by 
the said Mills to the said Agency under Regulation 131 
of the Articles of Association of the Company, the 
Company shall have paramount lien on and deduct 
and set off a moiety thereof against any payment 
which the said Mills may make in respect of the decrees 
or any of them and/or costs of the said suits. 
(ii) The said moiety shall be one half of the 
commission so payable less such sum as the Directors 
of the Mills may from time to time allow to be 
deducted." 
.. 
Under the said agreement, the respondent company 
paid 
to the Mill Company Rs. 22,500 made up of 
• 
1012 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950] 
t9oO 
Rs. 18,107 as principal and Rs. 4,393 as interest in the 
0 
-:--:-
1accounting year. The assessee company claimed this 
omm1ssioner o 
. 
Incomo-ta:c 
before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal as a deduc-
Weat Benadi tion permitted under section IO (2) (xv) of the Indian 
v. 
Income-tax Act. The relevant part of that section 
Calcutta Agency runs as follows :-
Ltd. 
"10. (1) "The tax shall be payable by an assessee 
Kania o. J. under the head 'Profits and gains of business, pro-
fession or vocation' in respect of the profits or gains of 
any bminess, profession or vocation carried on by 
him. 
(2) Such profits or gains shall be computed after 
making the following allowances, namely:-
.................................... 
(xv) any expenditure (not being in the nature 
of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the 
assessee) laid out or expended wholly and exclusively 
for the purpose of such business, profession or voca-
tion." 
In the statement of the case submitted by the 
Tribunal after reciting the fact of the incorporation of 
the company and the terms of the compromise mention-
ed above, the arguments urged on behalf of the assessee 
company have been recapitulated. The first argument 
was that under the first proviso to section 7 of the 
Indian Income-tax Act, this payment was liable to be 
exempted. The Tribunal rejected that argument. On 
the reference, the High Court also rejected the same 
and it was not presented before us. 
The next argu-
ment of the respondents was that in respect of 
Rs. 22,500 it was entitled to exemption under section 
10(2) (xv) of the Income-tax Act on the ground that 
the payment was an expenditure which was not in the 
nature of a capital expenditure or personal expenses of 
the applicant company but was an expenditure laid 
out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of its busi-
ness. They urged that if the applicant company did 
not agree to pay this amount, Basanti Cotton Mills 
Ltd. could have brought a suit against the company 
to realise this amount due on the hundis which would 
• 
.. 
-
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
1013 
have exposed the applicant company to the public and 
1950 
in order to save themselves from the scandal and main-
tain the managing agency they agreed to the deduction Commissioner of 
of certain amounts from the managing agency commis. 
1"come-ta•, 
sion due to it and thereby brought it within the 
West ,Bengal 
principles of the decision of 1Vlitchell v. B. W. Noble Oalcutt."Agency 
Ltd.(1) 
The Tribunal found as facts: (1) That the 
Ltd. 
applicant company agreed to pay off the decretal 
amount from the remuneration which they are entitled 
K.,nia o. J. 
to get from the Basanti Cotton Mills. 
(2) The decree 
was passed against the applicant company evidently 
for certain misfeasance committed by its directors and 
the applicant company agreed to pay it off from its 
remuneration. 
(3) The books of account of Basanti 
Cotton Mills Ltd. would show that they were paying 
the applicant company in full its remuneration and 
the books of the applicant company also show that it 
was entitled to its remuneration in full. 
(4) In the 
circumstances the Tribunal held that the expenditure 
was not laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose 
of carrying on the business. (5) Besides, the Tribunal 
was of the opinion that in this case it was not a 
revenue expenditure at all. As the payment had to 
be made towards liquidation of the decretal amount 
the Tribunal held, in the circumstances of this case, 
that it was a capital payment. On behalf of the res-
pondent it was argued in the further alternative that 
the Privy Council decision in Raja Bijoy Singh 
Dudhuria's easel.') would cover the present case. That 
contention was rejected by the Tribunal. 
This statement of the case prepared by the Income-
tax Tribunal and submitted to the High Court for its 
opinion was perused by the parties and they had no 
suggestions to make in respect of the same. The state-
ment of the case was thus settled with the knowledge 
and approval of the parties. When the matter came 
before the High Court, Mr. Mitra, who argued the case 
for the present respondents, as shown by the judgment 
of the High Court, urged as follows:-" If the applicant 
company had not agreed to pay the amount mentioned 
i 1l [J 921) 1 R. B. 719. 
12) 61.T,C. 449, 
• 
1014 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950] 
1950 
in the aforesaid agreement, then the Basanti Cotton 
Mills Ltd. would have sued the company for the reali-
Oommi"'•""' of sation of the amounts due on the hundis and it seems 
Incom•·tax, 
that there would have been no defence to the action. 
West Bengal T . 
Jd h 
b' 
d th 
l' 
t 
t 
v 
his wou 
ave su iecte 
e app ican 
company o 
Oa!cutt."Ag•ncy the danger of public exposure and in order to save 
Ltd. 
itself from the scandal and in order to maintain the 
managing agency, the applicant company agreed to 
Kania o. J. 
deduct certain amounts from the managing agency 
commission and therefore such expenditure came with-
in section 10(2) (xv) of the Act." The High Court 
thereafter noticed several cases including 111 itchell' s 
case(') and towards the close of the judgment delivered 
by Chatterjea J. observed as follows:-"In this case it 
is clear that the agreement was entered into with a view 
to avoid the publicity of an action against the mana-
ging agents and consequent exposure and scandal and 
in order to maintain the managing agency so that the 
company could carry on its business as before. 
The 
payment in question did not bring in any new assets 
into existence nor in my opinion can it properly be 
said that it brought into existence an advantage for the 
enduring benefit of the company's trade. The Appellate 
Tribunal observed that the decree was evidently passed 
against the appellant company for certain misfeasance by 
its directors and the appellant company agreed to pay 
it off from its remuneration ...... The object of the agree. 
ment was to enable the company to remove a defect in 
carrying on the business of the company and to earn 
profits in its business. Therefore this case is covered 
by the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Mitchell's 
case(') ...... " Applying this line of reasoning the High 
Court differed from the conclusion of the Tribunal and 
allowed the deduction to the respondent company under 
section 10(2) (xv) of the Income-tax Act, as claimed by 
the respondents. 
The Commissioner of Income.tax, 
West Bengal, has come in appeal to us. 
Now it is clear that this being a claim for exemption 
of an amount, contended to be an expenditure falling 
under section 10(2)(xv), the burden of proving the 
(l) [1927] l K.B. 719. 
... 
.. 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
1015 
necessary facts in that connection was on the assessee, 
1950 
it being common ground that the commission was due 
-:--:-
and had become payable and was therefore the business cc7m""
0;'" of 
income of the assessee company liable to be taxed in ,;.::m;;:;:.1 
the assessment year. The jurisdiction of the High Court 
v. 
in the matter of income-tax references is an advisory Calcutta Agency 
jurisdiction and under the Act the decision of the 
Ltd. 
Tribunal on facts is final, unless it can be successfully 
Ka1ita C. J, 
assailed on the ground that there was no evidence for 
the conclusions on facts recorded by the Tribunal. It 
is therefore the duty of the High Court to start by 
looking at the facts found by the Tribunal and answer 
the questions of law on that footing. Any departure 
from this rule of law will convert the High Court into 
a fact-finding authority, which it is not under the 
advisory jurisdiction. The statement of the case under 
the rules framed under the Income-tax Act is prepared 
with the knowledge of the parties concerned and they 
have a full opportunity to apply for any addition or 
deletion from that statement of the case. If they 
approved of that statement that is the agreed state. 
ment of facts by the parties on which the High 
Court has to pronounce its judgment. In the present 
case the parties perused the statement of case and as 
disclosed by the note made at the end of it had no sug-
gestions to make in respect thereof. It is therefore clear 
that it was the duty of the High Court to start with 
that statement of the case as the final statement of 
facts. 
Surprisingly, we find that the High Court, in 
its judgment, has taken the argument of Mr. Mitra as 
if they were facts and have based their conclusion 
solely on that argument. Nowhere in the statement 
of the case prepared by the Tribunal and filed in the 
High Court, the Tribunal had come to the conclusion 
that the payment was made by the assessee company 
to avoid any danger of public exposure or to save itself 
from scandal or in order to maintain the managing 
agency of the appellant company. The whole con-
clusion of the High Court is based on this unwarranted 
assumption of facts which are taken only from the 
argument of counsel for the present respondents before 
• 
• 
1016 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950) 
1950 
the High Court. The danger of failing to recognise 
-. -. 
that the jurisdiction of the High Court in these matters 
Commm•onu of· 
l 
d · 
d 
1 
l 
· 
f J 
T 'b 
1 
1 
· t " 
is on y a v1sory an 
t ie cone uswns o t ie 
n una 
;,;:;m;~:a~z on facts are the conclusions on which the High Conrt 
v, 
is to exercise such advisory jurisdiction is illustrated 
Oa'cutta Agency by this case. It seems that unfortunately counsel for 
Ltd. 
the respondents caught hold of Mitchell's case(1) and 
-
basing his argument on the circumstances under which 
Ka,zia 0. J. 
d 
a payment could be escribed as a business expenditure 
falling within the terms of section 10 (2) (xv), argued 
that the facts in the present case were the same. 
Instead of first ascertaining what were the facts found 
by the Tribunal in the present case, the process was 
reversed and the procedure adopted was to take Mit-
chell's case(1) as the law and argue that the facts in the 
present case covered the situation. In our opinion 
this is an entirely wrong approach and should not 
have been permitted by the High Court. The High 
Court fell into a grave error in omitting first to ascer-
tain what were the facts found in the case stated by the 
Tribunal. The High Court overlooked that in Afitchell's 
case(') the whole discussion started with a quotation 
from the case stated by the Commissioners as the facts 
of the case. 
A scrutiny of the record in the present case shows 
that before the 
Income-tax Officer the 
assessees 
claimed only a deduction of the interest of Rs. 5,582 
as a permissible deduction under section 10 (2) (iii) of 
the Income-tax Act. That claim was rejected by the 
Income-tax Officer. 
When the matter went to the 
Assistant Income-tax Commissioner it was argued that 
the Income-tax Officer was in error in not allowing the 
deduction of interest and was also wrong in not allowing 
the entire sum of Rs. 22,500 as a deduction on the 
ground that, that portion of the income (viz., Rs . .'22,500) 
should be treated as not earned or deemed to be earned 
by the assessees at all, having regard to the decision 
of the Privy Council in Raja Bijoy Singh Dudhuria's 
case.(') The first paragraph of the order of the Appellate 
Assistant 
Commissioner 
contains the 
following 
(ll [1927) I K, B. 719. 
12) 6 I.T.C. '49, 
• • 
' 
.. 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
l017 
statement:-" In disallowing this (interest) claim the 
1950 
Income-tax Officer was following the decision of my 
.--
predecessor in his order dated the 18th March 1942 in Oommimoner 0! 
Appeal No._ 1-~-~ 1 of.1941-42. My predecessor obser-
~:~·;;~~~1 
• 
ved: "Nothmg 1s m evidence to show that the managmg 
v. 
agency company had surplus money and such money Calcutta Ag••cv 
· was invested or that there was any need to borrow. 
Ltd. 
Thus the need to borrow is not established. There is 
no doubt that money was borrowed but lmless it can 
Kania c. J. 
to proved that the borrowing is for the purpose of the 
business and the loan was u:sed in the business, the 
interest cannot be allowed under section 10(2)(iii)." 
The second objection raised before the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner was in these terms:-·' That 
the Income-tax Officer should have allowed the said sum 
of Rs. 22,500 as allowable expenditure being alloca-
tion of a sum out of the revenue receipt before it became 
income in the hands of the assessee." The wording of 
the objection and the argument noticed in the order of 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner show that the 
contention was that this sum should be treated as not 
having become the income of the assessee at all because 
it was deducted at the source by the Mill company. 
Reliance was placed for this contention on Raja Bijoy 
Singh Dudhuria's case('). The contention was· rejected. 
At the third stage, when the assessee urged his conten-
tions before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, he 
thought of urging as an argument that this was a per-
missible deduction under section 10 (2) (xv) because of 
the principles laid down in Mitchell's case(2). 
No 
evidence, it appears, was led before the Income Tax 
Tribunal, nor has the Tribunal recorded any findings 
of fact on which the principles laid down in Mitchell's 
case(') could be applied. The Tribunal's conclusions of 
facts were only as summarized in the earlier part of 
the judgment. It is therefore clear that the necessary 
facts required to be established before the principles 
laid down in Mitchell's case(2) could be applied, have 
not been found as facts in the present case at any stage 
of the proceedings and the High Court was in error 
il) 6 I.T.C. H9. 
130 
(~) [19271 I K.B. 719. 
• 
• 
1018 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1950] 
1950 
in applying the principles of Mitchell's case(1) on the 
-. -. 
assumption of facts which were not proved. The High 
OomI missioner of Court was carried away, it seems, by the argument of 
ncome~tax, 
West Bengal the counsel and through error accepted the argument 
v. 
as facts. 
Indeed, if it had noticed the contention 
Calcutta Agenoy urged before the Income-tax Officer it would have seen 
Ltd, 
at once that the argument was in a measure conflicting· 
with that contention which was based on the foot-
Kania a. 1· ing of Rs. 1,80,000 being a loan to the assessee on 
which it had to pay interest, which was sought to be 
deducted under section 10 (2) (iii) of the Income-tax 
Act. In our opinion. therefore, this appeal should be 
allowed on the simple ground that the facts necessary 
to be established by the respondents to support their 
claim for exemption under section 10 (2) (xv) of the 
Indian Income-tax Act have not been established at 
any stage of the proceedings and therefore they are 
not entitled to the deduction claimed. The appeal is 
therefore allowed with costs here and before the High 
Court. 
Appeal allowed. 
Agent for the appellant : P.A. Mehta. 
Agent for the respondents: Ganpat Rai. 
(1) [19~1] 1 K.B. 719 . 
• 
'J' 
