r959 
.\fay 8. 
114 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
THE COM:HISSIOXJ<JR OF INCOME-TAX, BOMBAY 
1), 
H.ANCHHODDAS KARSONDAS, BOMBAY 
(S. R. DAS, C .. J., N. H. BHAGWATT, and 
M. HIDAYATULLAH, JJ.) 
I11comc-tax-I?eturn shozrii-ng inco1ne belou1 minimum taxable-
Tl'hcther a good return-Inco111e-tax Oj}ictr ignoring such return 
and issu.ing ,notice to assessee to fi.lt return-Assessment 1nade within 
one ~year of notice bnt be:yond four years of the end of th.e asscss1nent 
ycar--Validity of-Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (XI of r922), 
ss. 22 and 34. 
A public notice under s. 22(1) of the· Income-tax Act, 1922 
was published on May r, 1945, requiring every person whose total 
income exce'eded the niaximum amount \vhich \\'as not charge-
able to inco1ne-tax to file returns for the assr!ismcnt year 1945-46. 
On January 5, 1950, the assessee submitted a voluntary return 
,shOY\ting an inco1ne of Rs .. 1,935 for the :issessmcnt year 1945-46 
and adde<l a footnote to the return that his wife ha<l sold her old 
ornaments and deposited a sum of Rs. 59,026 with the Assar 
Syndicate in \Yhich he \Vas a partner. The Income-tax Officer, 
\vho had discovered these credits \Vhi1e exan1ining the accounts of 
the J\ssar Syndicate, ignored the voluntary return, and, on 
F'cbruary 27, 1950, issued a notice under s. 34(1) of the Act 
calling upon the assessec to submit his return. On lllarch J4, 
I950, the assessce submitted an identical return. The Income-tax 
Officer ina<lc the assessment on February 26, 1951, and included 
the su1n of l{s. 59,026 in the total incon1c of the asscssee. 
The 
asscssee contcndtd that the assessment \Yas,
1invalid as it \\'as 
cotnpletcd n1orc than four years after the end of the assessment 
year in violation ·of s. 34(r)(b). The appellant contended that 
the voluntary return \\'as no return as it clid not disclose any 
taxable income and tlic assesstnent \\'as valic.1 under the proviso 
to s. 3-1-(J) of the 1\ct, ha\'ing been rnacle \Vithin one year of the 
notice issued under s. 34(1). 
lle/d, that the assess111cnt 
\Vas invalid. 'fhe voluntary 
return filcU Uy t:ltc a~scssec, even though it. dicl not disclose any 
taxable inco1nc, 'ras a good return and could not be ignored. 1\s 
such no question arose und('r s. 34(r) of income escaping assess-
ment and the Incotne-tax Officer \\·as not justified i11 issuing the 
notice under s. 34(1). 
Tlw proviso to s. 34(3) was applicable only 
"·hen there ,\\'as a proper notice issued unlk·r s. 34(1) and the 
appellant could not take advantage of the time allowed by this 
proviso. 
'fhc as~essn1ent \\-'as clearly made bPyond four years of -
the end of the asscss1nent year I~J--l-.)-4() and \Vas tin1c harrcrl. 
llaraltchand l1.fakanji & C'o. v. c:(JJntnissioni:r of Income-tax. 
(1948) .IIJ I.T.R Il9; All India Groundnut Syndicate Ltd, v. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
115 
Commissioner of Incame-tax, (1953) 25 I.T.R. 90 and P. S. 
Rama !~·er v. Commissioner of Jncom,;-fa.i;, (1957) 33 1.T.l<. 451', 
approved. 
Commissioner of Agricultural I11comi:-tax v. Sultan Ali Gharami 
(1951) 20 l.T.R. 432; B. K. Das <~ Co. v. Commissioner of lllcom.:-
tax, (1956) 30 l.T.R. 439 and Commissioner of Income-lax v. 
Govindlal Dutta (1957) 33 I T.R. 630, disapproved. 
CIYTL APPELLA'l'E Jt"RISDIC'TION: Civil 
281of1955. 
Appral No. 
Appeal from the jwlgment and or<ler datPd :\larch 18, 
1954, of the Bombay lfigh C'ourt in Income-tax 
Reference No. 35 of 19'3~. 
K. N. Rajagopal Sa8tri and n. Oupta, for the 
appellant. 
R. J. Kolah and. Ram Ditta. Jlal, for the re1'!pondrnt. 
1959. May 8. 
The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by 
1959 
The Co1nmissioner 
of Jncm1u-tax 
Jlnmbay 
v. 
R11,11r-hhoddas 
l\a,·somlas, Bombay 
HIDAYATULLAH J.-This appeal on a certificate of Hidayatullah J. 
fitness granted by the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay has been filed by the CommisRioner of Income-
tax, Bombay against Ranchhoddas Karsondas. of 
Bombay (hereinafter referred to, as the assessce) under 
s. 66A of the Indian Income-tax Act. 
The facts leading up to this appeal are as follows : 
For the assessment year 194.5-46, a public notice under 
s. 22(1) of the Income-tax Act (hereinafter called the 
Act) was issued, requiring every person ·who8e total in-
come during the previous year exceeded the maximum 
amount which was not chargeable to income-tax to 
furnish, within such period not being less than sixty 
days as might be specified in the notice, a return of 
his income in the prescribed form and verified in the 
prescribed manner. This notice was published on or 
-
about Mav l, l!J45. 
The assessee dicl not make a 
return of );is income. The Income-tax Officer, \vhile 
examining the books of account of a partnership called 
the "Assar Svndic11te" of which the assessee was a. 
partner, founci that in the account year corresponding 
to the assessment year 1945-46, there were six cash 
credits aggregating to Rs. 59,026 in the name of the 
assessee's wife. 
Before, however, the Income-tax 
116 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
r959 
Officer could take any action, the assessee submitted a 
-. . 
"voluntary" return on January 5, 1950 of his income 
Th~, c1°"'"'"'1'°"" for the accounting year 1944-45 (assessment year 
o; 
ncome· ax, 
h 
. 
. 
Bombay 
1945-46) s owmg a total net mcome of Rs. 1,935. 
He 
v. 
added a footnote to the return to the following effect : 
Ranchhoddas 
"My wife has sold her old ornaments and deposit-
Karsondas, Bombay 
ed the sum of Rs. 59,026 in the firm of Assar Syndi-
Hidayatullah J. 
cate in which I am a partner." 
The Income-tax Officer did not act on this return, 
but on February 27, 1950 he issued a notice purporting 
to be under s. 34 of the Act calling upon the assessee 
to submit his return. This notice was served on the 
assessee on March 3, 1950; and in answer thereto, the 
assessee submitted a simifar return on March 14, 1950 
showing the same income and adding the same foot-
note. The Income-tax Officer then issued and served 
upon the assessee notices under ss. 22( 4) and 23(2) of 
the Act asking him to produce his books of account 
and to tender any evidence he cared to lead. It 
appears from the record that these notices were compli-
ed with, but on February 26, 1951 the Income-tax 
Officer included the sum of Rs. 59,026 in the total in-
come of the assessee and assessed him on it for the 
assessment year 1945-46. 
The assessee appealed, in turn, to the Appdlate 
Assistant Commissioner and the Income-tax Appt;llate 
Tribunal. His contentions were three, viz., that the 
amount of Rs. 59,026 could not and should not have 
been included in his income, that the amended s. 34 of 
the Act had no retrospective effect, and that the 
assessment completed on February 26, 1951 was in-
valid, inasmuch as it was completed four years after 
the end of the relevant assessment year. Both the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as the Tri-
bunal rejected his contentions, but the Tribunal on 
being moved by him, raised and referred two questions 
of law under s. 66(1) of the Act to the High Court of 
Judicature, Bombay, for its decision. These questions 
were:· 
"(1) Whether the notice issued under Section 34 
of the Act by the Income-tax Officer on 27-2-1950, 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
117 
after the assessee had filed a voluntary return was 
r959 
valid in law ? 
Th c 
· · 
(2) Wh I 
h 
d 
26 2 19
1':.} • 
e omnnsstnner 
et ier t e assess1nent. n1a e on 
- -
o 
IS 
Df Income-tax, 
valid in law ? " 
Hom/){ly 
This reference was heard by the High Court on 
v. 
March 18, 1954, and by a judgment delivered on the . Ranchhoddas 
same day, Chagla, C,J., and Tcndolkar, J., answered 1'arsondas, Bombay 
both the questions in the negative. 
Before the High llida_;.:;-:;1ah, J. 
Conrt, it was again contended by the assessee that 
since he had submitted a return under s. 22(3) of the 
Act on January 5, 1950, the assessment, if any, had 
to be completed before March 31, 1!)50, as required by 
s. 34(3) of the Act. 
He alRo contended that he was 
entitled under s. 22(3) to make [t " voluntary" return 
on the date he did, and with a voluntary return before 
the Income-tax Officer, there was no scope for the 
issuance of a notice under s. 34. The High Court up-
held the contentions of the asi.;essee, and gave its 
opinion that the Department ought to have issued a 
notice under s. 22(2) within the assessment year, and 
if no return was made within the time fixed by the 
notice; the Department 8hould have proceeded under 
s. 23(4) to a 'best judgment' assessment. The other 
alter1iative for the Department was to issue a notice 
under s. 34 of the Act, if the period for sending a 
notice under s. 22(2) had expired. But it could not 
issue a notice under s. 34 after a return was already 
made before it, and the benefit of the extended period 
of limitation for assessment available under the first 
proviso to sub-s. (3) of s. 34 of one year from the 
service of the notice under snh-s. (I) of that section was 
not available in this case. The High Court granted a 
certificate of fitness, and hence this appeal. 
The arguments which were urged before the High 
Court were all raised in this Court by the parties. The 
case of the Department was supplemented by ar 
argument that, inasmuch as the assessee had suppress-
ed his income or given incorrect particulars thereof, 
the period during which action under s. 34 could be 
taken was the extended one of 8 years. 
In the arguments before us, our attention was drawn 
to a cleavage of opinion between the Bombay High 
ll8 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
Court on the one lmnd and the Calcutta High Court on 
--: . 
the other. \Vhile the Bombay High Court seems to be 
Thr Commimnner of the view that. a "voluntary" return showing a non-
of lncome-tflx, 
.. 1 · 
· 
'II 
d 
t 
,. 
II 
Bombav 
taxau e moome is st1 a goo 
re .urn ior a 
purposes 
v. · 
under the Act, the Calcutta High Court is of the view 
Ranchhoddas 
that whats. 22(1) of the Act requires is a return of 
Karsnndas, ~nmhay taxable income and not a return of income, which 
·a -
11 h 1 shows a loss 01· 18 below ihe taxable limit. It appears 
Ht ovatu • 
• 
h t 
. 
h (' l 
H' ] C 
I 
. 
· 
t a at one t.nne t e ~a rmtta 
1g 1 ourt a so enter-
tained the view that such a, return was no return at all, 
but it was expl1tined later that this me,tnt that the 
return was ineffective for the purposes of s. 22(1) of tlw 
Act, though it might he IL "return" being in the 
prescribed form. 
The Bombay High Court also enter-
tains the view that the asse-ssment proceedings com-
mence with the issue of '' public: notice, and that s. 34 
of the Act cannot apply, whero in answer to the publie 
notice a return is made whether of taxable income or 
not. The view of the Calcutta High Court is that 
assessment proceedings commence either with a notice 
under s. 22(2) of the Art or with the filing of a return 
showing taxable income. 
We are not here concerned with the quantum hut 
only with the legality oHhe assessment. The side issue 
whether, in point of fact, the cash credits in the name 
of the wife represented the income of the husband does 
not survive for decision. Thus, the only question is 
whether the notice issued under s. 34 of i;lie Act on 
February 27, l!l50 (after the assessee filed his "vqlun-
tary" return on January 5, 1950) and the assessment 
thereon, were valid in bw. Section 34(3) of the Act 
provides that no assessment except the assessm1mt 
within cl. (a) of suh-s. (l) thereof or under s. 23 to which 
cl. (c) of sub-s. (1) of s. 28 applies, shall be made after 
the expiry of four years from the encl of the year in 
which income, profits or gains were first assessable. A 
proviso, however, allows one year from the date of tlH> 
service of the notice for t.he completion of the assess-
ment. It reads, omitting matters not relevant here :-
" ... where a notice under sub-section (1) has been 
issued within the time therein limited, the assessment 
or reassessment to he made in pursuance of such 
•
'' 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
119 
notice niay be made before the expiry of one year 
r959 
from the date' of the service of the notice even if 
-
h 
· d 
d th 
· d f 
£ 
" The Commissioner 
sue per10 exC'ee s 
e per10 o . . . our years . . . 
of !llcome-tax, 
It is, therefore, quite clear that the extra period is 
Bombay 
available only if a notice under sub-s. (1) of s. 34 has 
v. 
been issued within the time therein limited. This takes 
Ranchlwddas 
US to s. 34( 1 ). 
Karsondas, Bombay 
Sectic;:m 34(1), omitting parts not relevant, reads:-
Hidayatullali J. 
"(l) If ... 
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe 
that.by reason of the omission or failure· on the part 
of an assessee to make a return of his income under 
section 22, for any year ...... , or 
(b) notwithstimrling that there has been no omis-
sion or failure as mentioned in clause (a) on the part 
of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer has in con-
sequence of information in his possession reason to 
believe that income, profits or gains chargeable to 
income-tax have escaped assessment for any year ... 
* 
* 
* 
he may in cases falling under clause (a) at any time 
within eight years and in cases falling under clause 
(h) at any time 'vithin four years of the end of that 
year, serve on the assessee ... a notice ... and may 
proceed to assess such income ... " 
It would appear from this that if the return filed on 
January 5, 1950, was a return of income, there was no 
failure or omission on the part of the asscssee, so as to 
bring the matter within s. 34(l)(a) of the Act, and sub-
s. (3) of s. 34 would then apply to the case limiting the 
period to four years. In that event, the a:;sessmcnt 
should have been completed on or before March 31, 
19b0. 
But if the return made by the assessee was no 
return at all, then the conditions under the first sub-
section of s. 34 obtained, and the assessment could he 
completed within one year of the date of service of the 
notice (l\Iarch 3, 1950), i.e. on or before March 2, 1951. 
In that event, the asses:mient would be valid. The 
validity of the return in this context is tied to the 
validity of the notice and also i:ice versa. 
120 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
Section 22 of tho Aet (omiUing the parts not relev-
-
-. . 
a.nt) may now be quoted : 
li" c1°"
111""
1'°
11'' 
"(1) The Inuomo-tax Officer shall, on or before the 
o; nwme- ax, 
1 t l 
f M 
' 
] 
' 
t' 
b 
b]' 
Bombav 
s (a)' o l'v.iay, 111eac1 .~rear, g1\7C no ice, y }lU · IC· 
v. • 
ation iu the press ... , requiring every person whose 
Ranchhodda; 
total income during the previous year exceeded the 
/(arwnda;, Bombay 
maximum amount which is not chargeable to 
Hidayatullah ]. 
income-tax to furnish, within such period not being 
less than sixty days ... a return .. ., setting forth ... his 
total income and tot.ti world income during that 
year: 
• 
* 
* 
(2) In the case of any person whose total income 
is, in the Income-tax Officer's opinion, of such an 
amount as to render such person liable to income-
tax, the Income-tax Officer may serve a notice upon 
him requiring him to furnish, within such period, 
not being less than thirty days ... a return ... setting 
forth . . . his total income and total world income 
during the prov ions year: 
• 
• 
• 
(3) If any person has not furnished a return with-
in the time allowed l1y or under sub-section (I) or 
sub-section (2), or having furnished a return under 
either of those sub-sections, discovers any omission 
or wrong statement thprein, he may furnish a return 
or a revised return, as the case may be at any time 
before the assessment is made." 
It will be seen from this, that, as the Bombay High 
Court correctly pointed out, there is a time limit 
provided in sub-ss. (l) ti.ml (2) and the failure or omis-
sion occurs when that period passes, but sub-s (3) 
:;i,llows a locus poen:itentiae before the assessment is 
actually made. There is no disput_e that a return could 
be filed in this case, late though it was. The con-
troversy centres round the fact that the return, when 
it was filed, disclosed an income which was below the 
maximum not chargeable to tax, and the question is 
whether in such an event the Income-tax Officer was 
precluded from issuing a notice under s. 34 of the Act. 
There has been in the past a well-marked difference of 
opinion between the Bombay and the Calcutta High 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
121 
Courts, the leading cases in Bombay being Harakchand 
i95~ 
Makanji & Do. v. Oommiss-ioner of Income-tax (1), All The Commission" 
India Groundnut Syndicate Ltd. v. Commissioner of 
of Income-tu, 
Income-tax (2) and the decision under appeal here, while 
Bombay 
the Calcutta view is to be found in Commissioner of 
v. 
Agricnltural Income-tax v. Sultan Ali Gharami (3) R. K. 
Ranchhoddas 
• 
. 
' 
Karsondas, Bombay 
Das & Go. v. Commissioner of Income-tax(•) and Com-
missioner o.f Income-tax v. Govindlal Dutta e). To these Hiday~ah J. 
may be added P. S. Rlima Iyer v. C01nmi.ssioner of 
Income-tax (6), in which the Madras High Court has 
accepted the Bombay view. 
No useful purpose will be served in discussing these 
cases in detail. In some of them, the point need not 
have been taken up for decision, though it was. 
We 
shall refer very briefly to the two rival views and the 
grounds on which they are rested, and in doing so, we 
begin with the Calcutta decisions. In Sultan Ali 
Gharami's case (3), a notice under s. 24(1) of the Bengal 
Agricultural Income-tax Act (corresponding to s. 22(1) 
of the Act) was issued. 
No return was filed. 
Three 
years later, a notice under s. 24(2) of that Act 
(corresponding to s. 22(2) of the Act) was served, and 
a return showing an income below the taxable 
minimum was filed. 
The contention was that without 
a notice under s. 24(2) within the assessment year or a 
notice under s. 38(1) (corresponding to s. 34 (1) of the 
Act) the 'best judgment' assessment was bad. 
The 
contention further \Vas that the return could be taken 
to be under s. 24(1) or s. 24(3). Chakravarti, J. (as he 
then was) and Das Gupta, J., held that a person who 
had no assessable income was not placP-d under a 
duty to file a return, that the return whether filed 
under s. 24(1) or s. 24(3) which had failed to show an 
assessable income could not possibly be 'treated' as a 
return under s. 24(1) or even s. 24(3) when filed in 
answer to a notice under s. 24(2). They further observ-
ed at p. 442: 
"A return under section on 24(1) is a return filed 
by a person who decides for himself that he had an 
assessable income in the previous year and by filing 
(I) ( 1948) 16 I. T. R. II9. 
(2) (1954) 25 I. T. R. 90 
(3) (1951) 20 I. T. R. 432 
16 
(4) (1956) 30 I. T. R. 439 
(51 (1957) 33 I. T. R. 630 
(6) (1957) 32 I. T. R. 458 
'959 
The Commissioner 
of Income-tax 
Bombay 
v. 
R anchhoddas 
Karsondas, Bombay 
Hidayatullah ]. 
122 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
the return he offers that income for assessment. A 
person who had no assessable income in the previous 
year is placed under no duty by a notice under 
section 24(1) to furnish a return and a person who 
thinks, rightly or wrongly, that he had no assessable 
income will furnish none. 
A return under section 
24(1), whether filed within the time allowed under 
the section or filed subsequently under the provi-
sions of section 24(3), will therefore show an asses-
sable income ... A return which showed no assessable 
income, could not possibly be 'treated' as a return 
filed under section 24(1) or a return called for under 
that section but filed under section 24(3), when in 
fact it was filed in response to a notice under section 
24(2)." 
The opinion here expressed was criticised in the 
judgment 
under appeal, and in the next case, 
R. K. Das & Go v. Commissioner of Income-tax(•), the 
Calcutta High Court (Chakravarti, C.J., and Sarkar, J.) 
explained what was really meant. It is not necessary 
to refer to the facts of that case. This is what Chakra-
wrti, C.J., observed at p. 449 : 
" 'It should be remembered', I observed 'that the 
return in the present case is being sought to be 
treated as a return under section 24(1), belatedly 
filed.' 
And then I went on to say that a return 
under section 24(1) would only be filed by a person 
who thought that he had a taxable income and 
therefore a return showing an income below the 
taxable limit could not be held, on a construction 
thereof, to be a return under section 24(1) and 
consequently the return in the case we were then 
considering could not be treated as such a return 
filed under section 24(3). 
To say that, was not to 
say that even a return filed in compliance with a 
notice under section 22(2), if filed belatedly under 
section 22(3) could not be a return showing an 
income below the taxable limit.'' 
This left the matter somewhat ambiguous as to what 
was really meant, and in Commissioner of Income-f,ax 
v. GovindlaJ, Dutta('), Chakravarti, C. J., and Guha, J., 
(1) (1956) 30 I.T.R. 439· 
(2) (1957) 33 I.T.R. 630. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
123 
again explained the true import of the law laid down. 
x959 
They referred to s. 22(1) of the Act as it stood prior to Th c -. . 
e ommsssioner 
the amendment of 1953, and observed that under that 
0 , Incom6-tas 
section a person was required to file a return only if 
' Bombay 
his total income during the preceding year exceeded 
v. 
the maximum amount which was not chargeable to 
Ranchhoddas 
tax. The return contemplated was thus only a return Karsondas, Bombt1y · 
of income and not a return of loss and not even a Hidayatullt1h J. 
return of income, but a return of taxable income. Not 
only had a person no duty but he" had even .no right, 
to file a return voluntarily, if he had suffered a loss, 
to 'report' that loss. 
The learned Judges concluded 
that it was a complete mistake to think that s. 22(3) 
provided for the filing of a voluntary return showing 
loss, at any time, before assessment. 
That section, 
they opined, contemplated the filing of a return of 
taxable income, and a return not showing such income 
was not a return at all in law. 
The Calcutta view, as shown above, really proceeds 
upon the wording of s. 22(1). It lays down that the 
public notice requires only persons having an income 
above the taxable limit to make a return. A person 
who has no such. income need not make a return, and 
if he does make a return, it is not a return which need 
be considered, being not a return in law. 
It is a little difficult to understand how the exist-
ence of a return can be ignored, once it has been 
filed. 
A return showing income below the. taxable 
limit can be made even in answer to a notice under 
s. 22(2). 
The notice under s. 22(1) requires in a 
general way what a notice under s. 22(2) requires of an 
individual. If a return of income below the taxable 
limit is a good return in answer to a notice under 
s. 22(2), there is no reason to think that a return of a 
similar kind in answer to a public notice is no return 
at all. The conclusion does not follow from the words 
of s. 22(1). 
No dout>t, under that sub-section only 
those persons a.re required to make a return, whose 
income is above taxable limits, but a person may 
legitimately consider himself entitled to certain deduc-
tions and allowances, and yet file a return to be on 
the safe side. 
He may show his income and the 
124 
SUPREME COUii'l' REPORTS [1960(1}] 
' 959 
deductions and allowances he claims. 
But it may be 
T '" c 
. . 
that on a correct processing his income may be found 
~ om1niss1oner 
. 
. 
of Incom•-tax, 
to be above the exempted hm1t, No doubt, it is futile 
Bombay. 
for a person not liable to tax· to rush in with a return, 
v. 
but the return in law is not a mere scrap of paper. 
Ranchhoddas 
It is a return, such as the assessee considers, repre-
Karsondas, Bombay sen ts his true income. 
Hidayat1.tlah J. 
We are unable (and we say this with due respect} 
to accept the view ad,.umbrated in the Calcutta cases. 
The contrary \7iew is expressed by the Bombay High 
Court in the earlier ca.se of Harakchand Makanji & Co. 
v. Cornm·is.sioner of Incorne-tax (1) and in the judgment 
under appeal. That view was accepted by the Madras 
High Court in P. S. Raina Iyer v. Cornrnissioner of 
lncorne-tnx (') and also, in our opinion, is the sounder 
view of the two. In the earlier of the two Bombay 
cases, Chagla, C. J., and Tendolkar, J., held (as stated 
in the head note) : 
"Notice under section 34 is only necessary if at 
t.he end of the assessment year no return has been 
made by the assessee, and the authorities wished to 
proceed under section 22(2), but where the assessee 
himself chooses voluntarily to make a return, no 
question can arise under section 34 of assessment 
escaping, and therefore there is no necessity to 
8erve any notice under section 34." 
This represents the law applicable to the facts as they 
are to be found in this case. In the assessment year 
no return of income was filed, nor was any notice 
served under s. 22(2). There was, however, the general 
notice under s. 22(1). 
A return in answer to that 
notice could be filed under s. 22(3) before assessment, 
and for this there is no limit of time. 
It was filed on 
January 5, 1950. Th'ere was nothing to prevent the 
Income-tax Officer from taking up the return and 
proceeding to assess the income of the assessee. It 
was open to him, if there wa.s sufficient justification 
for it, to hold that the amount noted in the footnote 
was really the assessee's income, in which case an 
assessable income would have been found and the tax 
could be charged thereon. If the Income-tax Officer 
had acted on that return and assessed the assessee 
(I) (1948) 161.T.R. ug. 
(2) (1957) 32 I. T. R. 458, 
S·C.R 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
125 
before March 31, 1950, the assessment would have 
z959 
been valid. He chose to ignore the return, and served 
-
l 
. 
d 
34(l) 
Th. 
. 
The Commissioner 
on tie assessee a notwe ~n er s. 
. 
is notice 
of Income-ta~. 
was improper, because with the return already filed 
Bombay 
there was neither an omission nor a failure on the 
v. 
part of the assessee, nor was there any question of 
Ranchkoddas 
assessment 'escaping'. The notice under s. 34(1) was, Karsondas,Bombay 
therefore, invalid and the consequent assessment H idayatullah ] • 
equally so. 
vVe accordingly agree with the judgment 
under appeal. 
Before leaving this case, we may refer to two other 
arguments, whieh were raised. Mr. Rajagopala Sastri 
pointed out that an assessee might file the 'voluntary' 
retw.rn on the last <lay showing income less than the 
taxable limit, and the· Department would, in that 
case, be driven to complete the assessment proceed-
ings within a few hours or lose the right to send a 
notice under s. 34(1). 
An argument ab inconvenienti 
is not a decisive argument. 
The Income-tax Officer 
could have avoided the result by issuing a notice 
under s. 23(2) and not remaining inactive until the 
period wa.s about to expire. 
:Further, all laws of 
limitation lead to some inconvenience and hard 
cases. The remedy is for the legislature to amend" 
the law suitably. The Courts can administer the laws 
as they find them, and they are seldom required to 
be astute to de'feat the law of limitation. This argu-
ment is thus no answer to the dear meaning and· 
implications of the Act. 
The other argument was that the return was not 
a true one, and fell within the mischief of cl. (c) Of 
sub-s.(l) of s. 28, and that, therefore, the period during 
which action could be taken was the extended one 
of 8 years. The short answer to that is that this was 
not a part of the Department's case at any prior 
stage, and cannot be allowed to be raised now. 
In our opinion, the answers given by the High 
Court of Bombay were correct in all the circumstances 
of this case. 
The appeal thus fails, and is dismissed with costs. 
Appeal dismissed. 
