.. .. 
I 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
39 
before the Tribunal was to produce the statements 
x959 
recorded by the manager during what we have called Phulbari Tea Estati 
investigation. This left the matters where they were 
v. 
and Das had never an opport.unity of questioning the 
Its Workmen 
witneRRes after knowing in full what they had stated 
against, him. In these circumstances we are of opinion 
that the fiw.ling of t.he •rrilmnal that the enquiry i11 
this case was uot proper is correct and must Htand. 
'Ve therefore dismiss tlw appeal. 
We should, 
howeYer, like to make it elear tlrnt the order of tlw 
Tribunal fixing grant of compcnsa,tion till the date of 
payment must be taken to be limited to the sum of 
Rs. 11,125, which has been deposited in this Court in 
pursuance of this Court's order of April 22, 1957 and 
Das will not be entitled t.o anything more, as further 
stay of payment was pursuant to the order of this 
Court. In the circumstances we are of opinion that 
the parties should hear their own eosts of thits Court. 
Appeal dismis8ed. 
THE I.ORD KRISHNA SUGAR MILV3 LTD., 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
THE UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTH"ll~R 
(and connected petition) 
(B. l:'. SINHA, .J AFER IMAM, ,J. L. KAP(TR, A. K. SARKAR, 
SUH"HA RAO AND M. HIDAYATULLAH, ,TJ.) 
Constitution--Fundami:ntal Rights-Rcsirictions on-Reason-
ableness, relei·anf. considerations for fudging-Enactment obliging 
sugar manufacturers to s11.pply sugar for export ,,f loss-Notijicat-ion 
tinder another enactment increasing price of sugar for internal sale 
for recouping loss--Whether can 
be tulwn into consideration-
Discrimination-Sitgar Export Promotion Act, I958 (30 of I958), 
ss. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9-Constifation of India, Arts. I4 and I9-
Essential Commodities Act, I955 (IO of I955), s. 3--Sugar (Control) 
Wanchoo J. 
1959 
May 6. 
, • 
Order, I955. cl. 5· 
The petitioners challenged the constitutionality of the Sugar 
Export Promotion Act, 1958, which was enacted for the purpose 
of exporting sugar with a view to earning foreign exchange. The 
impugned Act imposed the following restrictions on the owners of 
40 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
z959 
factories producing sugar by the vacuum pan process: (i) it 
-. . 
obliged them to deliver to the export agency specified by the 
The Lord E.rishna Central Government the quota of sugar allocated to them; (ii) it 
Sugar Mills Ltd .• made them suffer a loss on this delivery of sugar; and (iii) it 
and Another 
exposed them to a penalty in case the delivery \vas short of the 
v. 
quota. By a notification issued under the Sugar (Control) Order, 
Thi! trnion of India 1955, which was made under·the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, 
and Another 
the Central Government increased the price of sugar for internal 
sales by 50 nP. per maund to enable the owners to recoup the 
loss suffered by them by the delivery of the sugar for export. 
The petitioners contended that it was not permissible to take the 
notification issued under another statute into consideration and 
that the impugned Act offended Arts. 14 and l9(1)(f) and (g) of 
the Constitution. 
Held, (per Sinha, Imam, Kapur, Sobba Rao and Hidayatul-
lah, JJ., Sarkar, J. dissenting) that the impugned Act was 
constitutionally valid. 
Per Sinha, Imam, Kapur and Hidayatullah, JJ. The 
restrictions placed by the Act upon the fundamental rights of the 
petitioners under Arts. 19(1)(0. and (g) were not unreasonable as 
arrangements \Vere made to save them frotn Joss by increasing 
the price of sugar for internal sales, thus passing on the loss to 
the consumers in India. The reasonablrness of the restriction 
and not of the law was to be determined, and if the restriction 
was under one la\v but countervailing advantages were created 
by another law passed as part of the same legislative plan, the 
Court must take that other law into account. The reasonableness 
of the restriction was to be judged at the time it was challenged 
and in the context of the circumstances then existing. The 
notification of the Central Government increasing the price of 
sugar to enable the recoupment of the loss occasioned by the 
export could 
be taken 
into consideration 
in 
judging the 
reasonableness of the restrictions. 
State of Madras v. V. G. Row [ro52j S.C.R. 597; Virendra v. 
The Slate of Pmijab, [1958] S.C.R. 308; Aru11achalam Nadar ''· 
State of Madras, 1959 S.C.J. 297; Attorney-General for Alberta v. 
Attorney-General for Canada, (1939) A. C. II7; Ladore ,., Bennet, 
(1939) A.C. 468 and Pillai v. Mudanayake, (1953) A. C. 514, relied 
on. 
The foreign export served the national interest by stabilising· 
the sugar market and stabilised national economy by earning 
foreign exchange. 
The loss, if any, was spread over many 
factories and was so small as not to amount to an unreasonable 
restriction. 
The Act did not offend Art. r4 of the Constitution in select-
ing sugar produced by the vacuum pan process for export and in 
leaving out sugar produced by other methods and other 
commodities from the mischief of the Act. The Government was 
the best judge as to which commodities were most likely to earn 
. ' 
·'
• 
} . 
I 
I . 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
41 
foreign exchange and the selection made was justifiable as a 
I959 
reasonable classification which was related to the object of the 
Act of earning foreign exchange. 
The Lord Krishna 
Per Subba Rao, J. 
In testing the reasonableness of the Sugar Mills Ltd., 
restrictions imposed by the impugned Act it was not permissible 
and Another 
to take into consideration the notification under the Sugar 
v. 
(Control) Order, 1955, increasing the price of Sugar for internal The Union of India 
sales by 50 nP. per maund. The test of reasonableness of one Act 
and A11other 
could be made to depend upon the impact of another Act on it 
only when the earlier Act was made part of later :\ct or when 
both Acts were parts of the same legislative scheme t..r plan. To 
go beyond this would be to destroy the stability of legislation 
and to introtluce an uncertain element. To go further and to 
depend upon a notification of a transitory natui·e issued under an 
unconnected Act would be to place the statute in a fluid state. 
The impugned Act and the Essential Commodities Act were 
enacted for different purposes. 
State of Madras v. V. G. Row [1952] S.C..R. 597; Attorney-
General for Alberta v. Attorney-General for Canada (1939) A. C. u7; 
Ladore v. Bennet (1939) A. C. 468 and Pillai v. Mudanaya/1e, 
(1953) A. C. 514, distinguished. 
The restrictions imposed by the impugned Act were not 
unreasonable as the j_ct served the national interest by earning 
foreign exchange for the State and building up foreign markets 
for the future prosperity of the sugar industry. 
Per Sarkar, J. The impugned Act which made the petitioners 
suffer a loss on the sale of a part of their produce imposed 
unreasonable restrictions on their fundamental right to carry on 
their business and was 
invalid. 
Though in 
deciding the 
reasonablene1>s of the restrictions imposed by the impugned Act 
all the prevailing conditions and circumstances had to be 
considered, the notification increasing the home price of sugar 
could not be taken into consideration. The impugned Act neither 
made it obligatory on, nor empowered the Government to take 
any steps to recoup the loss caused to the petitioners. The 
increase in the price dependetl solely on the arbitrary discretion 
or generosity or sense of fair play of the Government. It would 
be intolerable in any legal system that a statute should be legal 
when the Government chose to do a thing and illegal when it 
undid it and so on from time to time at the choice of the Govern-
ment. 
Besides, there was nothing in the Essential Commodities 
Act or the Sugar (Control) Order which authorised the Govern-
ment to increase the price for the sake of recouping to the 
manufacturers the loss caused to them by the impugned Act, and 
the validity of the notification increasing the home price of sugar 
was doubtful. 
State of Madras v. V. G. Row [1952] S.C.R. 597, distinguished. 
The impugned Act caused loss to the petitioners which was 
not negligible and thus imposed unreasonable restrictions on 
6 
42 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1 )] 
'959 
their right to carry on their business. 
The restrictions could not 
be fustified on tlie ground til<:it they resulted in stablising the 
The Lord J<rishn(' sugar industry as the industry did not require any stabilisation. 
Sugar Mills Ltd., The export \Vas not to b<· n1adc out of the excess of production 
and Another 
over internal consumption and in fact production in India had 
v. 
al\vays been less than internal consumption. 
The Union of Jndir' 
and A no titer 
0RIGINAI. ,JuRISDIC'rION: Petitions Nos. 9 and 14 of 
1959. 
Petitions under Article :J2 of the Constitution of 
India for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights. 
. ' 
A. V. Viswa,'rw,thv Sastri, and G. C. "o/Iathur, for the 
petitionern in Petition No. 9 of 1959. 
31. C. Setalvad, Attorney-General of India, B. Sen 
and R.H. Dhebar, for respondent No. 1 in both the 
petitions. 
J}[ .C. Setalvad, Attorney-General of Ind,ia, B. Sen 
and B. P. Jlfaheshwari, for respondent No. 2 in Petition 
No. 9 of 1959. 
N. C. Chatterjee and G. C. jfathur for the petitioners 
in Petition No. 14 of 1959. 
B. Sen and B. P. Jlfahesk1m.ri, for respondent No. 2 
in Petit-ion No. 14 of 1959. 
1959. l\fay 6. The judgment of R P. Sinha, Jafar 
Imam, J_ L. Kapur and l\L Hidayatul!ah, JJ,, was 
delivered by M. Hidayatu!l,1h, .J. A. K. Sarkar, J., 
and K. Snbba Rao, J., delivered separate judgments. 
Hidayatullah J-
HIDAYATULLAH J.-W'rit Petition No. 9 of 1959 
has been filed by the Lord Krishna Sugar Mills, Ltd., 
Saharanpnr and Shri Sushi! Kumar, a Director of the 
said Mills. It was heard along with "' rit Petition 
No. 14 of 1959, which has been tiled by Shiva Prasad 
Banarsidas Sugar Mills, Bijnor, through Seth Munnalal 
and also by him in his own name. These Mills are 
hereinafter referred to as the L. IC S. Mills and S. P, R 
Mills, respectively. The petitions raise the same con-
tentions, but in 'Writ Petition No. 14 of 1959, there is 
one more circumstance, which will be mentioned later. 
The petitions are directed against the Union of India 
and the Indian Sugar M.ills Association (Export Agency 
Division) Calcutta. The petitioners challenge inter alia 
-' 
S.C.R. 
SUPRE:\IE COURT REPORTS 
the constitutionality of the Sugar Export Promo-
z959 
tion Act, 1958 (30 of 1958), which shall hereafter be 
"' 
1 
J A 
"'h 
· 
l 
h 1 
]" 
The Lord Krishna 
re1erre( to as t ie 
ct. 
_i. .ey quest10n a so t c ega Ity Sugar Mills Ltd., 
of certain orders passed by the second respondent 
and Another 
purporting to be under the Act. 
v. 
Before describing how this matter came before the The Union °1 India 
C · 
· · 
· 
h 
J 
f' I 
A 
aud .lnnllter 
ourt, It IS convenient to give t e RC rnmo o 
t 10 d.Ct 
and to set out some of it8 provi,-;ions. 
On June 27, 
Hidayatul/ahf. 
1958, the President promulgated the Snga.r Export 
Promotion Ordinance, 1958, which wa.8 repealed by 
and re-enacted as the Act on September 16, 1958. 
The Ordinance was in the 8ame terms as the Act, and 
it is not necessary to refer to the Ordinance separately. 
more so because bys. 14 of the Act which repealed 
the Ordinance, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance is rleemed to have been done or 
taken under the Act, a.nd the Act itself is deemed to 
have commenced on the 27th day of June, 1938. 
Both the Ordinance and the Act were passed to 
provide for the export of sug~ir in the pi.1blic interest. 
and for t-he levy and collection in certain cirrumRtances 
of an additional duty of excise on sugar prodneed in 
India. 
To achieve this objective, the Act; :111thorises 
the Centl'al Government (as did the Orcliuance pre-
viously) to specify an export agency to perform the 
functions mentioned in the Ad., and the Central 
Government by a not.ification issued the r-;amc day, 
specified the Indian Sugar Mills Association (Export 
Agency Division) Calcutta, as the export agency. 
The Aet next provides that the Central Government 
may by notification in the Officia.l Gazette, fix the 
quantity of sugar to be . exported during any period 
taking into consideration : 
(a) the quantity of sugar available in the country; 
(b) the quantity of sugar rec1uired for consump-
tion in the country ; and 
; 
(c) the necessity of exporting sugar with a view to 
earning foreign exchange in the public interest, 
but, so as not to exceed 20 per cent. of the quantity to 
be produced in India in the season eudin,g with the 
month of October falling within that year. The Central 
44 
SUPREME COURT R.EPORTS [1960(1)] 
I959 
Government fixed 50,000 tons as the quantity to be 
-
exported up to December 31, 1958, later extended to 
The Lord Kriohna J 
31 19"9 
Th" 
ffi t" 
1 
· 
d 
5,.gar Mill' Ltd.. 
anJuary
27
, 
195
n
8
. 
IS no 1 ca Ion was a so Issue 
and Another 
O!l une 
' 
· 
v. 
Section 5 of the Act enables the Central Govemment 
The Union of India to apportion, by order in writing, the quantity to be 
and Another 
exported among " owners " of factories, the word 
Hidayatullah 1. "factory" being confined to a factory where sugar is 
produced by the vacuum pan process. The term 
"owner " is defined to include transferees, and agents 
and managers under Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951. 
The apportionment of the 
quantity of sugar to be exported is to be in proportion 
to the quantity of sugar produced or likely to be 
produced by the owners during the season referred to 
earlier. On the communication of the m-der to an 
owner, the quantity so apportioned is deemed to be 
the export quota for the factory ofthat owner. 
Section 6 then provides that on demand by the 
export agency, every owner shall deliver to it from 
time to time, sugar procluced in his factory in such 
quantities (not exceeding in the aggregate his export 
quota fixed for the factory or group of factories, as the 
case may be), of such grade, in such manner, within 
such time and at such place, as may be specified by the 
export agency in this behalf. If the sugar is delivered 
by a:-1 owner in accordance with the provisions of this 
section, he retains no rights in such sugar except his 
rights to receive ·payment therefor under s. 9 of the 
Act. 
Section 7 provides for levy of additional excise duty 
on sugar despatched from the factory for consumption 
in India, if the owner of a factory does not fulfil the 
demands under s. 6. It provides: 
"(1) Where sugar delivered ·by any owner falls 
short of the export quota fixed for it by any quantity 
(hereinafter referred to. as the said quantity), there 
shall be levied and collected on so much of the sugar 
despatched from the factory for consumption in India 
as is equal to the said quantity, a duty of excise at 
the rate of seventeen rupees per maund. 
.. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME corRT REPORTS 
45 
(2) The duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) 
I959 
shall be in addition to the duty of excise chargeable on 
-
d 
h 
1 
c 
th 
. 
b . 
. 
c 
The Lord Krishna 
sugar un er an.y ot er aw ior 
e time emg 111 .iorce, Sugar Mills Ud., 
and shall be paid by the owner to such authority as 
and Another 
may be specified in the notice demanding the payment 
v. 
of duty and within such period not exceeding ninety The Union ~1 India 
days as may be specified in such notice. 
and Another 
(3) If any such owner does not pay the whole or Hid1iyatullah J. 
any part of the duty payable by him within the period 
referred to in sub-section (2), he shall be liable to pay 
in respect of every period of thirty days or part there-
of during which the default continues a penalty which 
may extend to ten per cent. of the duty outstanding 
from time to time, the penalty being adjudged in the 
same manner as the penalty to which a person is liable 
under the rules made under the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944), is adjudged." 
By sub-s. (4) of this section, the provisions of the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the rules made 
thereunder are made applicable as far as may be, 
including those relating to refunds ·and exemptions 
from duty in relation to the duty mentioned in this 
section or any other sum due as a penalty. 
Section 8 then deals with the export by the export 
agency of sugar delivered to it. 
The section also 
authorises the sale of such sugar within India under 
certain circumstances. The section may be rcproducerJ 
in full here, as its terms will torm the subject of con-
sideratfon in the sequel. 
8(1) "The export agency shall take all practical 
measures to export sugar delivered to it under this 
Act: 
Provided that, if the export agency is of opinion 
that having regard to the quality of the sugar deliver-
ed to it by any owner, or to the expenses involved in 
transporting. the sugar from one place to another, or 
to the delay likely to be involved in exporting it,.or to 
the conditions prevailing in the markets for sugar, 
whether in or out of India, or to any other relevant 
circumstance, it is expedient so to do, the export agency 
may sell the whole or any part of the sugar in India 
46 
SUPREME COURT REPOHTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
>md may, if it thinks fit, purchase such quantity of 
-
sugar as it may co1'.sider necessary for export at the 
-
TheLordf\.rishna 
· t t'' 
• 
Sugar ,1till8 Ltd., <.1})J.)ro11r1a e .1n1e. 
and Ano""' 
(2) l•'or the purposos of sub-section (1), the export 
_ . v. 
. agency may itself sell sugar or permit the owner to sell 
Tiu·""'"" of 1"'1'"the whole or >:Lny part of the export quotn. in his 
aud Anolha 
. t . d 
t 
.· ' 
d ·1 
•t 
} ' · 
h t h 
cus .o y a a pnce approve 
)y 1 on cone 1t10n t a. t e 
srilc-riroceeds arc' rniyable to it." 
Hidayatullah ]. 
~ 
Section 9 deals with payments to owners who have 
delivered sugar for export. It provides n.s follows: 
(l) "The export agency shn.11, at such time as it 
thinks fit, make to the owners who ha.ve delivered 
sugar to it urnler this Act, payments dc,tc.rmined in 
accordance with the provisions hereinafter in this 
section contained. 
(2) From the tot.al sale-proceeds in respect of the 
quantity fixed for export under sec1 ion 4 for any year, 
there shall be deducted the total expenditure incurred 
by tho export. agency in respect of the sugar, whether 
by way of administrative expenses or otherwise, and 
the balance shall be apportioned among the owners in 
proportion to the quantity nf sugn.r deli\·ered by them 
respectively during tlmt ye»1". 
(3) In making any distribution under this section, 
the export 1igency shall make such adjustments as 
may he necessary having rc,gard to the grade of sugar 
t!elivcred hy tiny owner, the >tdjustnwnts being made 
on the basis of sugar of ISS-E-2fl grade and with 
reference to the price difforential schedule for different 
grades of sugar which the Central Government may, 
by notification in the OJficial Gazette, publish in this 
bC>half. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything eontn.ined in this 
section and subject to the rules which ma.y be nrnde in 
this behn.lf, the export agency may make on account 
payments to owners against documents of delivery of 
sugar furnished by them, and such payments shall be 
adjusted at the time of final payment." 
In the remaining five sections, the Act provides for 
aucilhtry matters, the hist (s. 14) incorporating the 
repeal of the Ordinance and sa vmgs. 
Section 10 
-
S.C.R. 
SUPl~EME COURT REPORTS 
47 
reserves to the Central Government the power to give 
x959 
directions to the export agency, and s. 11 allows the 
1 ' 
l (' 
d l 
b" 
d" · 
The Lord Krishna 
ventra ..-overnment to e egate, su 1ect to c011 1t10ns Sugar ill ills Ltd .• 
if any, its functions under the Act to an officer or 
and Another 
authority specified by notification. It may be pointed 
v. 
out that the Chief Director, Directorate of Sugar and The i:nion of lndia 
Vanaspati, Ministry of :Food ttnd Agriculture, was 
and Another 
specified aH such in a notification issued on Juno 27, 
c 
· 
f' 
l 
llidayatullah J. 
1958. Section 12 provides ior protect10n o ant 10rities, 
ands. 13 confers on tl].eCentral Government the power 
to make rules and includes a power to make a breach 
of any rule ·an offence punishable with fine extending 
to five thousand rupees. 
All such rules must be laid 
before Parliament, and may be modified by Parliament. 
Xo rules, however, have been made. 
We next proceed to the facts of these two cases. By 
an order No. 6(53)/58-SC, dated ,June 27, 1958, the 
Chief Director, Directorate of Sugar and V anaspati, 
fixed 461 ·05 and 412·04 tons of sugar as the quantities 
apportioned to the L. K. S. Mills and the S. P. B. J\fills 
respectively. On July 17, 1958 the export agency 
wrote to the two owners informing them of the quotas 
and their equivalents in bags, intimating nJ1m that the 
supply would be required in Grade C-29, and/or Grade 
D-29 and/or Grade E-29. Inquiry was made as to the 
grades and quantities in stock with them. It was also 
stated in these letters - that a further communication 
would be sent in due course giving detailed despatch/ 
delivery/disposal instructions for the export quota. 
They were also informed that the Central Board of 
J{evenue had issued detailed instructions to the Collec-
tors of Central Excise, and that it had been agreed 
that the order of the Chief Director (Sugar) served on 
the owners with copy to the Central Excise Officer of 
the fo,ctory concerned would also be the release order 
from the Sugar Directorate. 
Different replies were sent by the two petitioners. 
The L. K. S. Mills replied that they had only sugar of 
D-28 grade, while the S. P. B. Mills replied that they 
had E-29. On August 24, 1958, the export agency wrote 
to them that the export quota was diverted for inter-
nal sale. 
They were told that they were permitted to 
48 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
sell the "quotn, sug:tr" for iuternal consumption at the 
-
price of Rs. 36, per maund for Grade D-29, fixed by 
The LordKr;dma the Government. The export agency asked the two 
5
"!:~~;:!;";:a., Mills to Jet it know by telegram the grade in which the 
v. 
export quota was available, so that documents could 
The un;on of 1n<1;a be sent to enable (,hem to deliver sugar to their 
a11d A11othcr 
respective buyers. The export agency described the 
documents as follows : 
flidayatulla-11 J. 
"(1) A delivery order authorising the Central 
Excise Officer of your factory to deliver the quantity 
sold. 
(2) This delivery order will be sent through the 
Punjab National Bank Ltd., attached to a demand 
draft drawn on you for the tJ.mount of the sale proceeds 
payable to us. 
Please pay this on presentation. 
(3) The sale proceeds payable to us will be calculat-
ed as in the following examples :-
Sale price itt Rs. 36 per maund 
D-29 
Less Excise Duty to be paid by 
you 
Less 'on acco11nt' payment of 
Rs. I 0 per rnaun<l 
Amount for which draft will be 
drawn on you 
Rs. 
After receiYing the delivery order you will pay the 
Excise duty and deliYcr the sugar to the buyer. 
. 
" Gmde diffomntials will be allowed as per the 
Government Notification GSR. 661 d/30th July fixing 
ex-factory prices. 
The sale tmnsaction will be as between you and 
your buyer and the Export Agency cannot take any 
responsibility. 
\Ve now await to hear by telegram the grade avail-
n,ble. Please also S<iy in your telegram to which branch 
of the Punjab National Bank we should send the 
documents." 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
49 
The facts from here progress differently with these 
r959 
two petit~one.rs, and they are stated separa~e~y. !he The Lord -;rishna 
L.K.S. Mills mformed the export agency their mab1hty Sugar Mills Ltd., 
to sell sugar at the controlled rate fixed by the Govern-
and Another 
ment by its notification of July 30, 1958, as the market 
v. 
was very weak, and there were no purchasers of sugar The Union of India 
at the controlled rate even out of the releases made by 
and Another 
the Government for free sales. The export agency Hidayatullah J. 
reminded the L.K.S. Mills that the industry had agreed 
to finance the Export Agency Division by letting it 
have the sale-proceeds of sugar diverted for internal 
sale less Rs. 10 per maund as an "on account" pay-
ment. The export agency offered to show a concession 
to the L.K.S. Mills, and asked them to sell sugar in 
instalments of 1,500, 1,500 and 1,565 bags with a week's 
interval between each. It asked the L.K.S. Mills to 
co-operate and let the export agency send documents 
for 1,500 bags at Rs. 35·69 nP. per maund ex-factory. 
It appears that a mistake was made in putting down 
1,000 bags, but the meaning was perfectly plain. The 
L.K.S. Miils, however, insisted that they were unable 
to sell sugar at the controlled rate, and that as they 
were in financial difficulties, it was not possible to 
honour the documents as suggested by the export 
agency. 
The L. K. S. Mills proving obdurate, the export 
agency wrote on November 5, 1958, that it proposed to 
send documents for the full quota of 4,565 bags at 
Rs. 35·69 per maund. The L.K.S. Mills were requested 
to retire the documents immediately, as funds were 
needed urgently for purchase of additional quantities 
for export to replace the 
quota diverted for 
internal sale. It enquired the name of the bankers 
to whom the documents might be sent by the agency. 
The L.K.S. Mills, it appears, did not agree to any of 
the courses suggested, and the export agency wrote on 
November 27, 1958, that the L.K.S. Mills were requested 
to remit a sum of Rs. 1,88,216·63 nP. being the amount 
calculated at the rate of Rs. 35·69 nP. per maund in 
respect of the total sugar quota, less excise duty to be 
paid by the L.K.S. Mills and less "on account" payment 
of Rs. 10 per maund as indicated in the e&rlier letters, 
'( 
50 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
It also stated that unless the remittance was received 
The Lord Krishna by Decem?er 5, 1958, the permission to sell the quota 
Sugar Mills Ltd., sugar for mternal consumption would be withdrawn. 
aud Another 
Subsequent to this too, the export agency wrote to 
. v. 
. the L. K. S. Mills saying that a demand draft for 
The Union °1 India Rs. 61,845·57 nP. was being sent, to which was attached 
and Another 
th 
d l" 
d 
dd 
d 
h c 
I E 
. 
e 
e ivery or er a 
resse 
to t e 
entra 
xcISe 
Hidayatullah ]. Officer of the factory for releasing the first instalment 
of 1,500 bags. The L.K.S. Mills were asked to pay the 
excise duty and to clear the bags from bond and to 
intimate to the agency that they had done so. Similar 
documents were prepared for the other instalments and 
forwarded through the Bank. The L.K.S. Mills, how-
ever, did not agree to this, and the export agency 
thereafter on December 18, 1958, sent a telegram that 
unless the drafts were retired immediately, the quota 
sugar should be kept ready for despatch so that 
delivery might be taken by the export agency. The 
export agency also informed the L.K.S. Mills that 
otherwise the name of the Mills would be communicat-
ed to the Chief Director, Sugar, as a defaulter. The 
export agency also sent an order for delivery of the 
quota sugar, and required the L.K.S. Mills to depatch 
it by goods train, freight to pay, consigned to the 
export agency. It also intimated that the Mills should 
draw on the export agency for the amount of excise 
duty paid by the Mills plus "on account" payment at 
Rs. 10 per maund. Much was made of the error in 
describing the quota as of D-29, but in view of what 
· had already been understood, it cannot be suggested 
that the L.K.S. Mills were in any way misled. 
The L.K.S. Mills informed the export agency that 
their bank position did not allow them to honour 
the drafts, nor despatch the desired quantity of sugar 
at the rates mentioned by the agency. They also 
stated that they were not able to despatch more than 
, 
500 bags, as wagons over the Eastern Railway were 
• 
limited. The export agency, however, did not agree. 
• 
Finally, the export agency demanded remittance of 
the sum of Rs. 1,88,216·63 nP. by the 25th January, 
and gave the alternative to the L. K. S. Mills to 
despatch the sugar by that date according to the 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
51 
despatch instructions communicated earlier. 
The 
r959 
L.K.S. Mills wired saying that the Banks were demand- Th L d K . h 
ing interest and that the agency should instruct the su~a:~m;'~1';, 
Banks to forego interest. The export agency on 
and Another 
January 29, 1959, wired as follows : 
v. 
"Your tel. twentyninth without prejudice and to Ths Union of India 
'd 
· 
l' t' 
· t 
t• 
b 
k 
· 
and Another 
av01 serious comp ica ions we ms rue mg an waive 
_ 
interest. Regarding interest Committee will consider Hidayatullah 1. 
whose decision will be communicated in due course." 
' 
The petition (No. 9 of 1959) was, however, filed on 
January 27, 1959, that is to say, two days earlier. 
The facts relating to the S.P.B. Mills are as follows: 
After the letter of August 24, 1958 was sent, nothing 
appears to have been heard by the export agency. 
On November 27, 1958, the export agency asked the 
S. P. B. Mills to remit to it by December 15, 1959, 
Rs. 1,69,524. 77 nP. being the amount calculated in 
the same way as for the L.K.S. Mills. On December 14, 
1958, in continuation of this letter a despatch order 
for the entire quota was sent in the same terms as in 
the other case. In reply, the S.P.B. Mills pointed out 
that they were working the Mills as short-term lessees, 
having obtained the lease from the High Court of 
Allahabad on payment of Rs. 6,10,000 as lease money 
and Rs. 1,00,000 as security on August 6, 1956. They 
also pointed out that they were required to purchase 
additional machinery, stores etc., for a sum of Rs. 5 
lakhs, and that a sum of Rs. 3,43,500 was spent in 
connection with the repairs to the factory and wages 
for the period during which the factory was re-started. 
They further pointed out that they had suffered a loss 
of Rs. 2,40,000 in the last season and another loss of 
Rs. 50,000 on account of the strike of cane-growers in 
March, 1958; that all their sugar stock was pledged 
with the Punjab National Bank, Bijnor, against an 
advance of 75 per cent. of the price; and that there 
were arrears of cess amounting to about Rs. 5,50,000 
and that the lease money amounting to Rs. 6,10,000 
for the next season was also due. They therefore, 
expressed their inability to send any sugar: They also 
stated that if they redeemed the pledged sugar even 
after paying the "on account" money to the Bank, 
52 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
z959 
the Bank would be receiving Rs. 15-2-0 per maund 
-
less than the controlled price· of sugar. They further 
Ts"' LoMrd Ku,.,L· htdna stated that it was not possible for them to sell sugar 
ugar 
' s 
., 
1 
. 
fi 
b 
h 
. 
d 
and Another 
at the contro led pnce 
xed y t e Drrectorate an 
v. 
ended by saying that they were not in a position to 
The Union of India despatch sugar, pointing out at the same time that 
and Another 
the Act was unconstitutional and not binding on them. 
Hidayotullah ], 
The export agency, however, was not agreeable, and 
it asked the S.P.B. Mills either to deliver the export 
quota or pay the net sale-proceeds for the same, 
pointing out that the Mills ran the risk of liability for 
the additional excise duty of Rs.17 per maund. 
While matters stood at this stage ~nd the S. P. B. 
Mills had neither paid the amount demanded nor 
agreed to despatch the sugar, a petition was filed in 
this Court and a temporary stay was obtained. 
The questions that have been raised in these peti-
tions are many, but they can be grouped under two 
heads, viz., the vires of the legislation and the propriety 
of the action taken under it. The argument about 
the vires challenges the Act as a whole and also clause 
by clause. In regard to the vires of the Act, the peti-
tioners draw attention to the statement of objects and 
reasons, incorporated in one of the affidavits in the 
case. According to them, the declared object of the 
Act is to earn foreign exchange. They contend that 
if foreign exchange is so urgently needed, there should 
have been uniform legislation compelling other sugar 
manufacturers, who do not manufacture by the vacuum 
pan process, also to export sugar. This argument is 
based on alleged discrimination and on Art. 14 of the 
Constitution. The petitioners further contend that 
manufacturers of commodities other than sugar are 
not compelled to export in a like manner, and thus 
there is further discrimination. 
In our opinion, this argument is without substance. 
The power of Parliament to make laws in relation to 
foreign exchange is manifest. Entry No. 36 of the 
Union List specifically confers jurisdiction on Parlia-
ment to legislate in relation to foreign exchange. That 
Entry, if interpreted widely, would embrace within 
J 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
53 
itself not only laws relating to the control of foreign 
I959 
exchange but also to its acquisition to better the n 
L --;;~ . h 
economic stability of the country. 
The need for s~~ar
0
~1;u;~,;.: 
foreign exchange to finance the various development 
and Another 
schemes was, very properly, not disputed. It is thus 
v. 
plain. that the object of the Act is in the public interest. The Union of India 
If we are to exist as a progressive nation, it is very 
and Another 
necessary that we carve out a place for ourselves in Hidayat,.llah J. 
the International market. The beginning has to be 
made, and many a time, it is at a great loss. That the 
Central Government has selected the sugar industry 
for an export programme does not mean that it cannot 
make a classification of the commodities, bearing in 
mind which commodity will have an easy market 
abroad for the purpose of earning foreign exchange. 
During the Suez crisis, sugar was exported in large 
quantities from this country, and earned 12·4 crores 
as foreign exchange. There is nothing on the record 
to show that export of other commodities was not also 
undertaken, though it was pointed out in arguments 
that manganese ore was also exported in a similar 
manner to earn foreign exchange. It is quite obvious 
that the Central Government cannot order the export 
of all and sundry manufactured commodities from the 
country, without being assured of a market in foreign 
countries. 
Necessarily, the Government can only 
embark upon an export policy in relation to these 
products, for which there is an easy and readily 
available market abroad. For this reason also, sugar 
produced by the vacuum pan process may have been 
selected, because such sugar is perhaps in demand 
abroad and not.sugar produced by any other process. 
It must be realised that goods manufactured in our 
country have to stand heavy competition from goods 
produced abroad, and even this export can only be 
made at great sacrifice, and is made only to earn 
foreign exchange, which would not, otherwise, be 
available. 
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that 
there is discrimination in so far as sugar manufacturers 
by the vacuum pan process are concerned. Govern-
ment is the best judge as to which commodities are 
54 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
z959 
most likely to earn foreign exchange, and the selection 
-
. 
thus made is justifiable as a reasonable classification 
TheLordKrishna 
• h · 
1 
h 
b" 
f h A 
1 
h 
Sugar Mills Ltd., wh1c is re ated tot e o iect o t e 
ct, name y, t e 
and Another 
earning of foreign exchange. 
v. 
The next contention is under Arts. 19(1) (f) and (g) 
The Union of India and also 31 of the Constitution. 
The petitioners 
and Another 
Hidayatullah ]. 
contend that the whole export programme in respect 
of sugar amounts to an infringement of their fund-
amental rights under Arts. 19(1) (f) and (g), and 
amounts also to a compulsory acquisition of their pro-
perty without payment of compensation. The peti-
tioners analyse the scheme of the Act, and state that 
it amounts to taking sugar from owners for sale abroad 
at such price as it may fetch, the owners being paid 
when such money is received, after deducting the 
expenses of the export agency and the cost of export. 
They state that the owners stand to lose, because, 
admittedly, sugar is going to be exported at a loss, 
and the loss is to fall on the owners of factories. They 
further state that if the necessity for foreign exchange 
was felt, the loss entailed in the earning of foreign 
exchange should be borne by Government or be distri-
buted among all industries, or at least among all the 
sugar producers in the country. It is urged that the 
Act is an unreasonable restriction upon the fund-
amental rights to hold, acquire, and dispose of pro-
perty and to carry on occupation, trade or business. 
In reply, the learned Attorney-General on behalf 
of the Union as well as the Directorate of Sugar refers 
to the negotiations which took place between the 
Government and the sugar industry and the arrange-
ments which were made to save owners of factories 
from the loss which is inevitable as a result of this 
export programme. We were taken through the 
various Control Orders which were passed by Govern-
ment under the Essential Commodities Act about this 
time, fixing the. price of sugar for internal consump-
tion. In particular, referenee is made to the Sugar 
(Control) Order, 1955, Notification No. G. S. R. 661/ 
ESS. Com/Sugar dated July 30, 1958. It is pointed 
out that by that Notification the price of sugar was 
increased by 50 nP. per maund on all internal sales 
.. 
-
. , 
I 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
55 
to enable the factories giving their export quota to 
z959 
recoup themselves for the loss, which might be entail- The Lord :.rishna 
ed. It was anticipated that the loss would be recouped sugar Mills Ltd., 
if there was an increase of 50 nP. per maund in 
and Another 
the price of sugar for internal consumption and the 
v . 
export quota was fixed at 2i per cent. of •the total The Union of India 
production of a factory for 1957 -58. 
The loss, it was 
and Anoth., 
expected, would be more than set off by the excess Hidayatullah J. 
price which the producers would be able to get for 
every 20 maunds sold for internal consumption. It 
is also pointed out that Government at that time did 
not wish to take over the work of export on itself 
and specified as the export agency, the Indian Sugar 
Mills Association, a body composed of 95 per cent. of 
the sugar mills in the country. The learned Attorney-
General also points out that more than 95 per cent. 
of the mills have stood by this arrangement, and did 
either supply their quota of sugar or sold it in the 
internal market and made available the money for 
purchase of sugar for export. Only a few mills in the 
country resorted to these devices to get out of the 
commitment which the industry as a whole had 
entered into. The learned Attorney-General also 
contends that the petitioners had obtained favourable 
prices for sale of sugar in the country but were not 
willing to honour their other commitments which, 
after the agreement of the sugar industry, were given 
legislative form. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that 
the vires of the Act should be considered without 
reference to other circumstances such as the agree-
ments, price adjustments and price control, as they 
have no bearing upon the resonableness of the legis-
lation. In State of Madras v. V. G. Row (1), this Court 
laid down that in judging the resonableness of a 
restriction upon fundamental rights, the surrounding 
circumstances can be looked into. Patanjali Sastri, 
C.J., observed as follows : 
" It is important in this context to bear in mind 
that the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, 
should be applied to each individual statute impugned, 
(1) [1952J s.c.R. 597, 607. 
56 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
'959 
and no abstract standard, or general pattern of reason-
Th L 
. 
ableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. 
su~a:':ti~;·1;~~ The nature of the right alleged to have been infring-
and Another ' ed, the underlying purpose of the restrictions im-
v. 
posed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be 
The Union of India remedied •thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, 
and Another 
the prevailing conditions at the time, should all enter 
Hidayatullah J. into the judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive 
factors and forming their own conception of what is 
reasonable, in all the circumstances of a given case, 
it is inevitable that the social philosophy and the 
scale of values of the judges participating in the deci-
sion should play an important part, and the limit to 
their interference with legislative judgment in such 
cases can only be dictated by their sense of respon-
sibility and self-restraint and the sobering reflection 
that the Constitution is meant not only for people of 
their way of thinking but for all, and that the major-
ity of the elected representatives of the people have, 
in authorising the imposition of the restrictions, con-
sidered them to be reasonable." 
In Virendra v. The State of Punjab (1), S. R. Das, 
C.J., again reaffirmed this approach. See also Aruna-
cha'la Nadar v. State of Madras('). 
It is, however, contended that though one can look 
at the surrounding circumstances, .it is not open to 
the Court to examine other laws on the subject, unless 
those laws be incorporated by reference. In our 
opinion, this i.s a fallacious argument. The Court in 
judging the reasonableness of a law, will necessarily 
see, not only the surrounding circumstances but all 
contemporaneous legislation passed as part of a single 
scheme. The reasonableness of the restriction and not 
of the law has to be found out, and if restriction is 
under one law but countervailing advantages are 
created by another law passed as part of the same 
legislative plan, the Court should not refuse to take 
that other law into account. 
The existence of such other law is not difficult to 
establish. The Courts can take judicial notice of it. As 
was laid down by the Privy Council in Attorney-General 
(1) [1958] S.C.R. 308, 318. 
(2) 1959 S.C.J. 297, 299-301, 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
57 
for Alberta v. Attorney-General for Canada (1), the 
z959 
Courts in determining the effect of legislation, do take Th L. dK . h 
• 
• 
eor 
nsu 
into account, 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
"any public general knowledge of which the 
andAnot/ur 
Court would take judicial notice, and may in a proper 
.v. 
. 
case require to be informed by evidence as to what The U~·~· 
0{h India 
the effect of the legislation will be. 
Clearly, the Acts 
an 
no er 
passed by the Provincial Legislature may be conside-
Hidayatullah J. 
red, for it is often impossible to determine the effect 
of the Act under examination without taking into 
account any other Act operating, or intended to oper-
ate, or recently operating in the Province." 
No doubt, this was laid down in a case falling within 
ss. 91 and 92 of the British North America Act, but 
the general proposition is equally applicable where the 
effect of the legislation on those governed by it has to 
be measured. In the same connection, their Lord-
ships looked into the historical background of legii;i-
lation to find out the materials which were coni?idered 
before the legislation was promoted in the legislature. 
See also Ladore v. Bennett (2). This Court also in 
Arunacluila Nadar v. State of Madras( 8), examined the 
' historical background ' and discovered the object of 
the Act, "from the circumstances under which it was 
passed." 
That other oontemporaneous legislation passed as 
part of a legislative plan can be ex11-mined was clearly 
laid down by the Privy Council in Pillai v. Muda-
nayake ('). In that case, the question was whether 
the Ceylon Citizenship Act (18 of 1948) and the 
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Amendment Act 
(48 of 1949) were valid, or were ultra vires the 
Ceylon Parliament, being void under s. 29(2) of the 
Ceylon (Constitution and Independence) Order-in-
Council, 1946 (as amended). Under the first two Acts, 
the Indian Tamils were denied as a community, the 
right of franchise unless they came within the terms 
of the first Act. They were thus subjected to dis-
abilities and restrictions which were prohibited by 
(1) (1939) A.C. u7, 130. 
(2) (1939) A.C. 468, 477. 
8 
(3) ~959 S.C.J. 297, 299-301. 
(4) (1953) A.C. 514. 
58 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1960(1)] 
'959 
s. 29(2) of the Order-in-Council. During the course of 
Th L d K . h 
arguments, their Lordships' attention was drawn to a. 
5,.~.:~m;•;_,;~ later Act, intituled the Indian and Pakistani Residents 
and Another 
(Citizenship) Act (3 of 1949), under which the Indian 
v. 
Tamils and others were entitled to get themselves 
The Union °! India registered a.s the citizens of Cey Ion on proof of 
anti Another 
sufficient connection with Ceylon. It was argued by 
Hidayati<llah 1 Mr. Pritt, Q.C., before the Privy Council that the later 
Act could not be read to justify the earlier Act, because 
if the impugned Citizenship Act were bad when it was 
passed, it could not be 'brought back to light' by the 
enactment of the subsequent Act. Their Lordships 
did not accept this argument and read the later Act 
with the previous. They observed : 
" It was argued that sections 4 and 5 of the 
Citizenship Act made it impossible that the descen-
dants, however remote, of a person who was unable to 
attain citizenship himself. could ever be able to attain 
citizenship in Ceylon no matter how long they resided 
there, but their Lordships' attention was subsequently 
drawn to the Indian and Pakistani Residents (Citizen-
.ship) Act, No. 3 of 1949, by which an Indian Ta.mil 
could by an application obtain citizenship by registra-
tion and thus protect his descendants, provided he had 
a certain residental qualification. It was suggested 
on behalf of tho appellant that this Act might itself 
be ultra vires as conferring a privilege upon Indian 
Tamils within s. 29(2)(c) of the Constitution Order-in 
Council, and that i herefore it was inadmissible to 
rebut the inference that the legislature had intended 
by the Citizenship and Franchise Acts to make Indian 
Tamils liable to dis>il>ilities within the meaning of 
s. 29(2)(b), but their Lordships cannot accept this 
argument. If there was a legislative plan the plan 
must be looked at as a whole, and when so looked at 
it is evident, in their Lordships' opinion, that the 
legislature did not intend to prevent Indian Ta.mils 
from attaining citizenship provided that they were 
sufficiently connected with the island. " 
It is not necessary to speculate as to the remedies of 
the sugar dealers if the Sugar Control Order, or the 
notification were varied or abrogated in future. The 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
59 
reasonableness of the restriction is to be judged today 
z959 
and in the context of the circumstances now existing. The Lord Krishna 
It cannot but be accepted that the Government sugar Mills Ltd., 
made adequate arrangements to recoup the sugar 
and Another 
industry for the loss which it might suffer in giving 
.y. 
. 
the export quota. For that purpose 
though the The Union °1 Ind"' 
fi 
d 
2 1 
' 
f h . 
and Another 
export quota was 
xe 
at 
2 per cent. o t e total 
quantity produced by a factory, the loss which was Hidayatullah J. 
expected to be Rs. 10 per maund was spread over the 
remaining sugar to be sold in the country and was 
recouped at 50 nP. per maund. We are unable to 
accept th~ plea that the petitioners were not able to 
sell sugar at the controlled price, because the price was 
fixed too high. Learned counsel for the petitioners 
contend that by fixing a ceiling there is no guarantee 
that the commodity will be sold at the ceiling price 
and not at a lower rate. It is a well-known proposi-
tion that when commodities are controlled by fixation 
of price, the commodities sell only at the controlled 
price and not less. Economists have complained that 
the worst fault of price control is that the price does 
not fall below the controlled rate. There is nothing 
in the record of the case to show that the Mills were 
not able to sell their sugar at the controlled price. 
We are satisfied that the object of the Act does not 
infringe the fundamental rights of the petitioners. To 
prevent any loss to the petitioners, countervailing 
additional prices were allowed on sales of sugar for 
internal consumption. The petitioners did not stand 
to lose ultimately. The quota was fixed at 2! per cent. 
of their total production, and it is inconceivable that 
they are unable to sell sugar in the open home market. 
This suggestion of the petitioners that they are unable 
to sell sugar at the controlled price has not been 
substantiated by the production of a single document 
to show what they held in stock and what they had 
sold. The balance sheet produced by the S. P. B. Mills 
shows that they were able to sell more than a lakh of 
bags in eight months, as against the quantity of 4,079 
bags for export. 
It is obvious that the plea that the Mills are unable 
to sell sugar at the controlled price is a mere sham. 
60 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
r959 
Indeed, an examination of the correspondence in the 
first case clearly demonstrates that the Mills were 
The Lord K rislina devising one excuse or another to a void the liability 
Sugar Ii-fills Ltd., 
andAnother 
to supply the quota of sugar. ]'irst, they raised the 
v. 
contention that they did not have the requisite grade. 
The Union of !>ldia Then they raised the contention that they could not 
and Another 
sell sugar. Thereafter they asked for supply in instal-
Hidayatullah J. ments, and when instalments were fixed, they put 
forth the excuse of there being no wagons available. 
They next urged that the Bank was charging interest, 
and that interest should be waived before the docu-
ments would be retired. When interest was waived, 
they filed the petition iu this CouJ.lt. 
In these 
circumstances, in our opinion, there can be no ground 
for holding that there has been an infringement of the 
fund,imental rights of the petitioners. The restriction 
was not unreasonable, because arrangement was made 
to save the owners of the factories from loss, and the 
loss entailed by the export of sugar was to be borne 
by the consumers in India and not by the producers. 
There is oue more circumstance which may be 
considerecl. 
The foreign export served the national 
interest by staqilising the sugar market so that the 
production of sugarcane niay be maintained at a 
rea,;onable level. It also stabilised national economy 
by earning foreign exchange. 
The loss, if any, was 
comparatively small and was spread over many 
factories. Apart from the very real possibility of its 
being recouped by sales in the country, the loss itself 
was so small as not to amount to an unreasonable 
restriction. 
The petitioners next challenge the Act in its parts 
to show that there is infringement of fundamental 
rights or, in the alternative, compulsory acquisition of 
their property without compensation. In this connec-
tion, ss. 5 to 9 are challenged. Section 5 only permits 
the Central Government to fix the quota leviable from 
different factories. If the object and purpose of the 
Act is valid and also is in the public interest, there 
being no disadvantage to the owners ultimately, s. 5 
which fixes the quota for export from sugar produced 
by a. factory 
cannot be 
challenged 
sepa.ra.tely •. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
61 
Section 6 makes it incumbent on the owner to supply 
z959 
that! sugar on demand and further provides that after Th L d K . 11 
deli~ery of sugar, the owner retains no rig~t exc~pt ~o su;a,
0
~;11;:_,;;: 
receive payment therefor under s. 9. 
This sect10n is 
andAnother 
criticised on the ground that delivery of goods and 
v. 
paym.ent of the price should be concurrent conditions, The Union of India 
that is to say, that the buyer should be ready and 
andAnother 
willing to pay the price in exchange for possession of Hidayatullah 1. 
the goods. If the Government w~s buying sugar, the 
provisions of s. 32 of the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 
which is apparently relied upon here, might have been 
invoked. The object and purpose of the Act is to 
export sugar and to divide the receipts less expenses, 
among the owners who supply sugar for export. The 
argument over16oks the scheme that export is made 
by a Central Agency for the industry as a whole, and 
the prices obtained abroad are payable, and they are 
less than those at which sugar of various grades sells 
within the country. The section does not suffer from 
any infirmity, if the object and purpose of the Act is, 
as has been found above, valid and constitutional. It 
must not be forgotten that during the time payment 
was due, the owners were getting an additional 50 nP. 
on every maund sold by them in the country. Deferred 
payment is not deprivation of property, nor an en-
croachment upon fundamental rights. The affidavits 
show that the entire quota of 50,000 tons has been 
exported, that it has earned Rs. 2·4 crores in. foreign 
exchange, and that the exporters have been paid 
except for a small balance. 
Section 7 is the penalty section. We heard consi-
derable argument as to whether the section would 
apply to a case where no delivery was at all made, in 
view of the words : 
"where sugar delivered by any owner falls short 
of the export quota." 
No action has yet been taken against the Mills under 
the section ; nor has any penalty been imposed. The 
question whether the section is ultra vires the legisla-
ture need not be considered here. 
Section 8 deals with export of sugar or its sale by 
the owner or the export agency. It is stated that the 
62 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
z959 
section deals with sugar delivered to the export agency, 
T1"LordKrishna and.here.there ~as no sugar delivered. The first otidb-
Sugar Mills Ltd.. section <1eals with export, and the export agency can 
.,.d Another 
only export sugar delivered to it. The second sub-
. v. 
. section authorises the export agency to sell the sugar 
Th• Umon °! Ind•a for reasons given in the first sub-section. It also 
and Another 
authorises the export agency to permit the owner to 
Hidayatullah 1. sell sugar in his custody. In the present cases, there 
was a demand for delivery of the sugar of the quota, 
and that has not been met. Whether the petitioners 
have exposed themselves to any penalty can only be 
considered when penalty is actually imposed on them. 
The condition that the sale-proceeds are payable to 
the export agency is perfectly valid, regard being had 
to the scheme of the export and the advantage allowed 
on all sales in India. The owners having obtained that 
advantage cannot claim to keep the proceeds of such 
sales, by which the export policy is to be run. Out of 
the 50,000 tons, about half was sold in India, and with 
the sale-proceeds other sugar was bought and exported, 
and this would not be possible if the export agency 
were required to make a spot cash payment. 
Section 9 provides how payments to owners are to 
be made. Since the export was by a non-profit-making 
agency composed of the sugar industry, it is obvious 
that the payments could not be made forthwith. As 
explained already, the owners received payment after 
the sale prices were received from abroad. Necessary 
deductions of expenses have to be made, and the 
proceeds are then distributed. No doubt, such payment 
is likely to be somewhat delayed but looking to the 
small quantity involved (i.e. not more than 20 per cent. 
under the Act and in actuality, only 2i per cent.) it was 
not likely to make it very hard for the owners, who 
were in the meantime breaking this loss at the rate of 
50 nP. for every maund of sugar sold in India. In our 
opinion, none of the sections considered here, even 
viewed separately, is ultra vires. 
The petitioners did not cliallenge the action taken 
by the export agency as being contrary to the Act. No 
argument can be considered in view of the want of a 
plea to this effect in the two petitions. In the petition 
-
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
63 
by the S. P. B. Mills, the petitioner did not invite any 
r959 
decision on the correctness of the demand for the The Lord Krishna 
additional excise duty, because no such duty has, in Sugar Mills Ltd., 
fact, been demanded. The main contention of the 
and Another 
Mills was that all sugar was pledged with banks. The 
. "· 
. 
pleadings on this part of the case are far from clear or The Union of India 
ffi · 
Th 
1 
c 
· 
l tt 
h. J • 
and Another 
su 01ent. 
. e on y re~erence is to a e er, w IC 1 1s 
insufficient. ·However, in view of the fact that learned 
counsel reserved this point to be raised for exemption 
from payment of additional duty, we say nothing 
about it. 
The result is that both the petitions fail, and are 
dismissed with costs. 
SARKAR J.-I think these two applications should 
Sarkar]. 
succeed. They raise the question whether the Sugar 
Export Promotion Act, 1958 is invalid as imposing 
an unreasonable restriction on the petitioners' right to 
carry on their trade. 
Some of the petitioners are owners of factories 
manufacturing sugar by a process called the vacuum 
pan process and they carry on business as manufac-
turers of and dealers in sugar. For the purposes of 
this judgment these persons may be taken to be the 
petitioners. The principal respondent in these applica-
tions is the Government of India. The other respon-
dent is the Indian Sugar Mills Association, an associa-
tion of manufacturers of sugar by the vacuum pan 
process. 
On June 27, 1958, the Government had promulgated 
an Ordinance. The impugned Act was passed on 
September 16, 1958 repealing the Ordinance and re-
enacting its provisions and also providing that anything 
done under the Ordinance would be deemed to have 
been done under the Act as if it had come into force 
when the Ordinance had been promulgated. 
As appears from its preamble, the Act was intended 
to provide for the export of sugar in public interest 
and it set up a machinery for that purpose. I will 
summarise here the main provisions of the Act. Sec-
tion 3 empowers the Central Government to specify a 
company or other body corporate as the export agency 
to perform the functions of that agency under the Act. 
64 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
r959 
The respondent Indian Sugar Mills Association was 
The Lord Kdsh"a specified as the export agency under this section. 
sugar Mill., Ltd., Section 4 authorises the Central Government to fix the 
and Anotha 
quantity of sugar that may be exported during any 
. v. 
. period, but the quantity so fixed for a year is not to 
The Umon of India exceed twenty per cent. of the quantity of sugar 
and Another 
produced in India upto the month of October in that 
Sa>kar 1. 
year. 8eotion 4 also provides that. "in fixing such 
quantity the Central Government shall have regard to 
-(a) the quantity of sugar available in India, (b) the 
the quantity of sugar which, in its opinion, would be 
reasonably required for consumption in India, (c) the 
necessity for exporting sugar with a view to earning 
foreign exchange in the public interest." Section 5 
requires the Central Government to apportion the 
quantity fixed under s. 4 among the owners of factories 
producing sugar by the vacuum pan process in pro-
portion to the quantity produced or likely to be 
produced by them respectively, during the season. The 
quantity so apportioned to each factory is called its 
export quot:t. Section 6 provides that every owner of 
a factory shall, on demand by the export agency 
deliver to it sugar upto its export quota and on delivery 
" the owner shall retain no rights in respect of such 
sugar except his right to receive payment therefor 
under section 9." Section 7 makes provision for an 
additional excise duty being levied in certain circum-
stances on the quantity of sugar by which the sugar 
delivered by the owner of a factory falls short of its 
export quota. Section 8 states that the export agency 
shall export the sugar delivered to it, provided that in 
certain circumstances specified, the export agency may 
sell that sugar in India and may if it thinks fit pur- · 
chase other sugar for export and for this purpose permit 
the owner to sell the whole or part of its export .quota 
at a price approved, on condition t.hat the sale proceeds 
are paid to it. The provisions of s. 9 are important 
and will be set out later. It is not necessary to refer 
to the other provisions of the Act. 
Soon after the Ordinance had been promulgated the 
Government started taking action under it. 
By a 
notification dated June 27, 1958, 50,000 tons of sugar 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
65 
was fixed under s. 4 as the total quantity for export 
1959 
for the period ending October 31, 1958. Export quotas 
~ 
The Lord /{rish11a 
were duly fixed for all factories including those of the suxar Mills Ltd., 
petitioners. The petitioners were thereafter asked by 
and Another 
the export agency to sell the sugar and pay the sale-
v. 
proceeds to it.. 
This they failed to do. It is said by Thr Uuion °! India 
the respondents that the petitioners were also asked to 
and ~tlier 
deliver the sugar and this also they failed to do. 
The 
Sarkar]. 
petitioners spt, up various reasons justifying their failure 
to sell or deliver the requisite quantities of sugar. 
rt 
is unnecessary to refer to theRe reasons for if thn Act 
is invalid, as 'the petitioners contend the orders could 
not be made and no question would arise as to whether 
the petitioners had valid reasons for not carrying them 
out. It appears that t.l1e export agency felt that the 
petitioners were neither going to sell the sugar and pay 
the sale proceeds nor to deliver the sugar and it there-
upon pointed out to the petitioners that they were hy 
their conduct exposing themRelves to the risk of 
having to pay the additional excise duty under s. 7. It 
was then that the present applicationR for appropriate 
writs restraining the respondents from taking steps 
under the Act were launched by the petitioners on the 
ground inter alia that the Act was invalid as it 
unreaRonably restricted the petitionerR' right to carry 
on their trade. I now proceed to examine the ,-alidity 
of this contention. 
From the provisions of the Act earlier set out, it is 
quite clear that it requires the owner of .a sugar factory 
to part with a portion of the produce of his factory in 
exchange for an amount to he fixed under the provi-
sions of s. 9. 
The Act therefore restricts his freedom 
of trade; it takes away his right to trade with the 
whole of his merchandise in any manner he likes. The 
question is, is such restriction reasonable ? 
. 
It is necessary now to set out the terms of s. 9 of 
the Act which fixes the amount which a manufacturer 
of sugar in entitled to receive in respect of the sugar 
delivered by him. Only sub-ss. (1) and (2) of this sec-
tion need' be set out and they are as follows : 
Section 9.-(l) The export agency shall, at such 
time as it thinks fit, make to the owners who have 
9 
66 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)) 
'959 
delivered sugar to it under this Act, payments deter-
T '· L dK. h 
mined in accordance with the provisions hereinafter in 
,~ or 
ris Ha th' 
. 
. d 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
IS sect10n contame . 
and Anothtr 
(2) From the total sale-proceeds in respect of the 
. v. 
. quantity fixed for export under section 4 for any year, 
Th• a~'';n1,~;ut,. there shall be deducte~ the total expenditure incurred 
by the export agency m respect of the sugar, whether 
Sarkar J. 
by way of administrative expenses or otherwise, and 
the balance shall be appportioned among the owners 
in proportion to the quantity of sugar delivered by 
then respectively during that year. 
The substance of the matter then is that an owner 
of a sugar factory gets in exchange for the sugar deli-
vered by him under the Act, a proportionate share of 
the sale-proceeds less the Pxpenses. He has no hand 
in deciding at what price the goods would he sold by 
the export agency. If they are sold for a very low 
p;ice, he has no right to complain. Neither has he any 
power to control the expenses. The exchange value 
that a sugar manufacturer is entitled to get under the 
Act for sugar delivered by him, therefore, depends 
entirely on the export agency. Again, under sub-
sec. (1) of s. 9, the export agency need pay the manu-
facturer only at such times as it thinks fit. It may he 
difficult to say that all these terms are reasonable. 
However that may be, there is another aspect of the 
question which in my view decides it. It is quite plain 
that as things are, sugar can be sold abroad only at a 
loss. That clearly appears from the materials on the 
record and is not indeed disputed. I think it enough to 
refer to the Objocts and Reasons of the Act and to a 
statement in the affidavit of Shri K. P. Jain, Chief 
Director, Directorate of Sugar, affirmed on February 13, 
1959 and filed on behalf of the Government, to show 
that the Act contemplated that the export of sugar 
made under it would result in a loss. In the Objects 
& Reasons of the Act it is stated, 
"With a view to earning foreign exchange it is 
necessary to promote export of sugar. The export of 
sugar, however, involves a loss, even if excise duty 
and cane cess are remitted." 
S.C.R 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
67 
In paragraph 22 of Shri Jain's said affidavit it is 
z959 
stated, 
T' 
. 
"If 
h 
h 
th 
t' 
h 
. 
d 
iieLordKf<shM 
urt er Ray t at... 
e en ire sc eme envisage 
sugar Mills Ltd. 
in the Act depends on the pooling of the losses on 
and Another ' 
export by all sugar factories in India, in proportion to 
v. 
their export quota.'' 
The Union of India 
We then get to this that on the respondents' own 
and Another 
case the exports under the Act can he made only at a· 
Sakrar J. 
loss. The result therefore is that the Act compels the 
p()titioners to part with a portion of their merchandise 
at' a loss. Can the restrictions so put on the petitioners' 
trade by the Act then be said to be reasonable ? I 
conceive it is impossible to do so. It is said that the 
Act was passed with a view to earn foreign exchange 
by export of sugar. Indeed so it appears from the 
Objects & Reasons of the Act earlier set out and the 
provisions of s. 4 earlier quoted. 
I will agree that 
earning of foreign exchange is essential for the country. 
But I do not see that that justifies the enactment of a 
legislation which imposes a loss on a sugar manufac-
turer. It is not as if foreign exchange could not be 
earned without inflicting loss on the manufacturers of 
sugar. That indeed is not the respondents' case. The 
loss might have been avoided if for example, the 
exports were made by the grant of a subsidy, a course 
in fact adopted by the Government in the year 1951-52. 
It.has not been said that there was any diffieulty in 
granting the subsidy for the exports under the Act. A 
reasonable restriction on a citizen's right to carry on 
his trade which alone is permitted by Art. 19(6) of the 
Constitution, must be, as Mahajan, J., said in Chintaman 
Rao v. The State of Jl;Jadhya Pradesh(1), a restriction 
"which reason dictates", which "unlei;s it strikes a 
proper balance between the freedom guaranteed in 
article 19(1) (g) and the social control permitted by 
clause (6) of article 19, must be held to be wanting in 
that quality." Here I do not find the balance struck 
nor the infliction of the loss a course which reason 
dictates. The loss which the restrictions imposed by 
the Act on the petitioners' trade caused to them, was 
by no means such as could only have been avoided by 
incurring a greater loss. 
(1) [1950] S.C.R. 759, 763. 
68 
SUPREME COURT REPOH.TS 
[1960(1)) 
'959 
I also think it clear that an object however laudable, 
cannot by itself and without more, make a restriction 
The Lord Krishna 
S«gar Mills Ltd .. put on a citizen's right to carry on a trade for attain-
and Another 
ing that.object, reasonable. A restriction on a per-
v. 
son's right to carry on his trade does not become 
The Unio11 of Indio reasonable, simply because it had been imposed on 
and Another 
him to achieve an object of great necessity and un-
. doubted merit. The reasonablent>SS has to be judged 
Sarkar]. 
in ;111 the circumstances of the case and the object to 
be attained is only one of such circumstances. 
This, 
in my view, is too clear to require elaboration. 
It is not neeessary for me to pursue the matter 
further for it is not the respondents' contention that 
the 1·estrictio11s are reasonable notwithstanding that 
they <'anse loss. 
On the other hand, the contention of 
the respondents is for reasons to be presently stated that 
the Act really caused no loss and that being so the 
restrictions imposed by it cannot he said to be un-
rea.sonable. I proceed now to consider t.he respondents' 
rea.son for saying that the Act imposes 110 loss on the 
sugar manufacturers including the petitioners. 
It is fi1·st s;1id that though the exports result in n 
loss now, it may in future bring in profits. That hope 
is dearly only a pious hope. 
Aud whaf" is more, it is 
not a hope which has even been expressed in the 
nffidavits filed. on behalf of the respondents. On the 
contrary, these affidavits make it perfectly plain that 
in the foreseeable future there is no hope of export of 
sugar being made at a profit. Indeed, it is said in 
these affidavits that the scheme of the Act is bnsed on 
the pooling of the losses caused by the exports made 
under it. It is hardly neeessary to point out that if 
the exports con kl be expected t.o prnduce a profit in 
in the near future, the nocrcivc machinery of the Act 
for making the exports would he unnecessary. There 
is no bn,is whntcver for snying that in some years the 
export may result in a profit. 
Indeed on the respon-
dents' own affidavits it is not open to them to say 
that they hope that it may be possible in future to 
make a profit oil export of sugar. 
Then it is said that the export quota. fixed for 
1957-58 is only 2! per cent. of the production of each 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
69 
factory. The point sought to be made is that, there-
I9.S9 
fore, the amount of the loss would be very small. Now The Lord Krishna 
2l per cent. of the produrtion of the factory of the Sugar Mills Ltd., 
petitioners in Writ Petiti0 1n No. 9 of 1959 is 12,533 
and Another 
maunds. It is stated by t.he respondents in the sup-
v. 
plementary affidavit of Shri Jain affirmed on March 11, The Union of India 
1959, that on the export the loss will be in the region 
and Another 
of Rs. 10 per maund. 
On this basis the loss to the 
Sarkar J. 
petitioners in that petition would be Rs. 1,25,530. 
The loss to the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 14 of 
1959 would be slightlY. less. I for myself would hesitate 
to say that losses in such amounts are negligible. The 
export quota for 1958-59 has been fixed at 5 }Jer cent. 
of the production. Naturally, the loss would be much 
larger. The Government have the right under the 
Act to increase the quota upto 20 per cent. The loss 
if the quota i;:; increased to the utmost would be for-
midable. In the cases of factories with larger produc-
tion the losses would be much larger than the peti-
tioners losses. 
And of course the reasonableness of 
the restrictions imposed by the Act has to be tested 
generally and without reference to any particular sugar 
mannfacturer. 
I am also unable to agree to the 
proposition that the reasonableness of a restriction 
depends on the quantum of the loss it produces. Even 
a small loss may conceivably make a restriction caus-
ing it, unreasonable. The quantum of the loss cannot 
by itself decide the reasonableness of the restriction. 
Does reason dictate that a small loss shall be inflicted? 
Nothing that has been said in this case leads me to 
hold that. 
It is then said that the loss caused by the Act was 
recouped by an order made by the Government in-
creasing the home price of the sugar and therefore in 
fact the manufacturers suffered no loss. The process 
of recoupment was thus stated in paragraph 14 of the 
said main affidavit of Shri Jain: 
" The incidence of loss on the first quota of 50,000 
tons fixed by the Government was assessed and when 
the Central Government fixed the price of sugar for 
internal consumption under the provisions of the 
Essential Commodities Act and the Sugar (Control) 
70 
f;UPREME <'OORT HEPOHTS 
[i!l60(1)] 
Order, 1955, they gave adjustment in price by adding 
50 nP. per nrnuud in the ex-factory prices of sugar for 
The Lord Krishna internal s:iles." 
I959 
Sugar J.1.,Jills Ltd., 
and Anoth" 
It is said that the increase so made in the home price 
v. 
of sugar would completely wipe out the loss incurred 
The Union vf In.i;a on the export under the Act of 2~ per cent.. of thl' 
and Anothu 
produce of a factory. 
I will accept this as a correct 
S1irkar J. 
estimate. 
I will also ignore the petitioners' contention 
that they had not been able to Hell the sugar in the 
home m,trket at t,hc incre•tsed price. 
· 
The argument then is that though the impugned 
Act produces a loss, that loss can he ignored because 
the Government has taken steps under another Aut to 
recoup the loss so occasioned. It is s1tid that in the 
circumstances that prevail, namely, the increase in the 
homo price, the restrictions imposed by the impugned 
.\ct cannot he said to be unreasonable, for on the whole 
they occasion no loss. 
This is indeed the principal 
contention of the respondents to establi"h tfoit t.lie 
restrictions are not unreasonable. 
Now a reference to the Essential Commodities Act 
under which t,he home price was increased ha" to be 
made, 
Jt. wa" passed in Hie year 1955. It was not 
intended to ont·n foreign exchange; indeed it had 
nothing to do with foreign exchange or with helping 
the sugar industry. Section 3 of this Act provides: 
"Section 3. (l) If the Central Government is uf 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for 
maintaining or increasing supplies of any essential 
commodity or for securing their equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices, it may, by order, provide 
for regulating or prohibiting the production, supply 
and distribution thereof and trade ,i,nd commerce 
therein. 
(2) 
Without prejudice to the generality of the 
powers conferred by sub-section (l), an order made 
thereunder may provide 
(c) for controlling the price at which any essential 
commodity may be bought or sold." 
Sugar is an essential commodity within the meaning 
of that term in the Act. Under the powers conferred 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
71 
by the section quoted above, on August 27, 1955,. the 
z959 
Government passed an ordf;lr called the Sugar (Control) The Lord Krishna 
Order, 1955. Clause 5 of that order provides that, 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
"(1) The Central Government may from time to 
and Another 
time, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the 
. v. 
. 
price or the maximum price at which any sugar may The UdniAon °11hlndsa 
b 
Id 
Sh . .  ,. 
annner 
e so . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . uc price or maximum price 
shall be fixe<l with due regard to the price or minimum 
Sarkar J. 
price fixed for sugar cane, manufacturing cost, taxes, 
reasonable margin of profit for producer and/or trade, 
and any incidental charges. 
(2} Where the price or the maximum price has 
been so fixed no person shall sell or purchase ........... . 
any sugar at a price in excess of that fixed under sub-
clause (l)." 
It was under this Order that the Government issued a 
Notification on July 30, 1958, enhancing the home 
price of sugar by 50 nP. per maund which it is said 
wipes out the loss caused by the impugned Act. 
I will assume that the Notification increasing the 
price was issued with the object of recouping the loss 
caused by the impugned Act as stated in the affidavit 
of Shri ,Jain, though the Notification itself does not 
say so. 
The question then is, is the increase in the 
home price of sugar made by the Government by a 
Notification issued under the powers given to it by 
another Act which has the effect of wiping out the loss 
inflicted by the impugned Act, a circumstance which 
makes the restrictions imposed by the latter Act 
reasonable? 
It is said that this is so ; that in judging the reason-
ableness of the restriction imposed by one Act, it is 
permissible to consider an order made by the executive 
Government under another Act. We were referred to 
the observations of Patanjali Sastri, C. J., in State of 
Madras v. V. G. Rao (1). 
The learned Chief Justice 
there stated at p. 607: 
"The nature of the right alleged to have been 
infringed, the underlying purpose of the restrictions 
imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought 
to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the 
(1) (1952) S.C.R. 597· 
72 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
'959 
imposition, the prevailing conditions at the time, should 
TlieLm·d lfri.<lmn all enter into the judicial verdict." 
SuKar Mill.< Ud., 
I respectfully agree with all that the learned Chief 
and A.wt'"' 
Justice sairl, but 1 am unable to see that this advances 
Tl U . v. 11 1. the present contPution of the respondents. 
W'hat is 
1e 
11u111 o 
1u 1a 
II 
1. 
. 
. 
. 
and Auniher 
rea Y re w1l upon 18 that port10n of the learned Cluef 
Justice's obs<'rvation where he snid tha.t the pre\•ailing 
Sarlw J. 
conditions nt the time should be taken in into account. 
Ruppnrt. is sought a.lso from a.noth0r observation of 
the learnPd Chi<'f .Tnstice at t.\w snme pagP which 1 
lrn ve not quotPd, to the effect t !mt. reasonableness has 
to be decided in all the circumstances of a givPn case. 
It is said that the prm·ailing conditions anrl the cir-
cumstances of the case would inclrnfo 1-hc orrler increas-
ing the home price of sugar made under the Essential 
Commorlit.ies Act. 1 am entirely unable to 11grec that 
suuh n thing was in the contemplation of the learned 
Chief ,Jnsticn. 
The case before him was uomplctely 
different. He <.'as not co!lsidning the reasomtbleness 
of one Ad. bv refrrPnce to an order made hr the 
Govcl'nment u;1der another. The learned Chief lustiee 
was considering whether a certain Act had placed un-
reasonable restrictious on the firnrlamental right to 
form associations. The Act had given t.hc C:.overnment 
the right to dechirl' an association an unlawful associa-
tion on cprt>tin specified grounds. 
In holdi11g the 
restrictimrn imposed by the Act nmmsona.hle, the 
learned Chief .J m<tice observed 11t p. 608, "The formula 
of snbjPC'tive ~>ttisfad.ion of the Covernnwnt or of its 
officers, with an Ad \'isory Board thro\Yll in to review 
the materials on which the Government sePks to over-
ride a bnsic freedom !!Uaranteed to the citizen, may he 
viewt'd as reasonable only in very exceptional circum-
stances and within the narrowest limits and cannot 
receive judicial approval as a general pattern of 
reasonable restrictions on fundamental rights." I do not 
at all set' that the respondents can derive any support 
for their present contention from anything that 
Patanjali Sastri, C.J., said. 
I entirely agree that in deciding the reasonableness 
of the restrictions imposed by a statute, all the prevail-
ing conditions and all the circumstances of the case 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
73 
have to be considered. But I am wholly unable to see 
r959 
that the conditions or circumstances, which seem to 
-K. h 
h. 
. l d 
h 
h" h TheLord 
ris na 
me to mean the same t m_g, can .me u. e t at w IC 
Sugar Mills Ltd. 
depends solely on the arbitrary discretion or generos-
and Another 
ity or the sense of fair play of another. That, in my 
v. 
view, is not permissible. That is not a reasonable The Union of India 
and Another 
test. It is not reasonable to say that the validity of a 
statute would depend on something which the execut-
ive Government may do or undo at any time. The 
statute imposing the restrictions does not give any 
right that the Government would do something to 
make the restrictions reasonable. How can such a re-
striction be reasonable? How can an Act which is 
prima facie unreasonable-and it is on that basis that 
the present argument arises-be held to be reasonable 
because of something to which it gives no right and 
the existence of which depends entirely on the choice 
of the executive Government ? Is it to be said that the 
restrictions imposed by a statute are reasonable 
because the Government has, when the question crop-
ped up, done something which makes the restrictions 
reasonable though it was not bound to do that and 
though it is free to undo that which it has done ? To 
say that would be to say that the Act is valid because 
the Government has for the time being chosen to 
make it so. This seems to me to be against all known 
principles of law. 
Furthermore, if the respondents' contention was 
right a statute would then be legal when the Govern-
ment chooses to do a thing and illegal when it undoes 
it and so on from time to time at the choice of the 
Government. That would be intolerable in any legal 
system. It was said that this is unavoidable and may 
happen in many cases. The following illustration was 
given. Suppose in famine conditions a statute was 
passed controlling free sale of foodstuff. 
Assume that 
the prevailing conditions made the restrictions put on 
free sale reasonable. Later. normal conditions returned 
which made the control of sales of foodstuff unneces-
sary and therefore unreasonable. The Act would 
thereupon become invalid. But further suppose that 
after sometime the famine conditions returned. The 
IO 
Sarkar]. 
74 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)) 
'959 
validity of the Act would then be restored. Hence, it 
T 
-
is said that there would be nothing unusual in the Act 
'"Lord Krishna b . 
rd 
d . 
]"d f 
t" 
t 
t" 
B t •t 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
emg va 1 
an 
mva. 1 . rom 1me o 1me. 
u . l 
and Another 
seems to me that thIS IS no analogy. The famme 
v. 
conditions imagined do not depend on the choice of 
The Union of India the Government. So, assuming that the appearance 
and Another 
and disappearance of famine conditions from time to 
time made the Act o~ce valid and again invalid-as to 
Sarkar]. 
which I do not feel c lled upon to say anything now-
that does not justify' the adoption of a rule which 
would make the validity of an Act depend on the 
choice of the Government. If fluctuating validity is 
the result in one case, it does not follow that the same 
consequence would occur in another and a totally 
different case. 
Again the validity of the Notification enhancing the 
home price seems to me to admit of grave doubt. I 
find nothing in the Essential Commodities Act nor 
naturally in the Sugar (Control) Order, 1955, which 
would authorise the Government to increase the 
price simply for the sake of recouping to the manu-
facturers the loss caused to them by the impugned 
Act. I have earlier set out the relevant provisions of 
the Essential Commodities Act. The power to fix 
the prir ~ of sugar given thereby can be exercised " for 
maintaining or increasing the supplies of any essential 
commodity or for securing their equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices". That power cannot 
therefore be exercised for recouping loss caused to a 
manufacturer by another Act, the object of which is to 
earn foreign exchange. If it is said that the Notifica-
tion was issued for the purposes mentioned in the 
Essential Commodities Act, it becomes at once apparent, 
that the price fixed under it has no relation to the 
impugned Act and may have to be altered irrespective 
of the latter Act. I find it impossible to say that a 
Notification fixing the price of sugar on different condi-
tions can be taken into account in deciding the 
reasonableness of the impugned Act which is entirely 
unconnected with these considerations. 
For all these reasons I am unable to agree that the 
Notification increasing the home price can be taken 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
75 
into consideration in deciding the reasonableness of the 
z959 .. 
restrictions imposed by the impugned Act. It follows The Lord Kmr.na 
th t th 
t . . 
d 
l 
t 
tl 
St<gar Mills Ltd., 
a 
ese res notions 
o cause oss 
o 
lC sugar 
and Anothtr 
manufacturers and there is nothing to show that the 
v. 
restrictions are even so reasonable. 
The Union of India 
Then it is said that the Indian ~ugar Mills Associa-
and •1" 01ner 
tion of which the petitioners <1l'e Raid to be members, 
Sarkar J. 
wanted that arrangements for export. of sugar abroad 
be made and it was for that reason that the impugned 
Act was passed. It was suggested that the Association 
agreed to the Act being passed. It is therefore contend-
ed that the restrictions imposed by the Act must be 
presumed to be reasonable and the petitioners cannot 
be heard to say that they are not. 
Now the request 
by or the agreement of the Association is of course 
not the request by or the agreement ofthe petitioners. 
The Association has no authority to bind the peti-
tioners by any request or agreement. The fact that 
the petitioners were members of the Association if 
that were so, does not give the Association the 
authority. There is no evidence that the petitioners 
had assented to the Association making the request or 
the agreement. l!'or all that is known the petitioners 
may have been agaim;t the As::;ociation making any 
request to the Government to take steps for export or 
agreeing to the passing of the Act. Therefore, it 
seems to me that the petitioners' rights are not affected 
by anything which the Associctt.ion might have done. 
I think it/ right also to say that there is no material 
on the record whatever to lmtd to the conclusion that 
the Association had agreed to the Act being passed in 
the form in which it stands. And of course it is only the 
Act with which we arc concerned. It is true that the 
Association had suggested that the Government should 
take steps for export of sugar. That would a.ppra.r 
from the minutes of various meetings annexed to thl' 
affidavits used on behalf of the Government. But there 
is nothing in these minutes nor anywhere else in the 
records which would indicate tlrnt the Association 
wanted that sugar should be exported though that 
might put the manufacturers to a loss. The position 
appears to have been this. In the yaar 1951-52 the 
76 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)) 
'959 
sugar manufacturers were placed in a difficult position 
The Lo"l Krishna because of competition from khandsari and gur 
sugar Mills Lid.. manufacturers, who could buy sugar cane for their 
and Another 
manufactures at a low price in the open market, while 
v. 
the sugar manufacturers were compelled to buy cane at 
The Union °! India prices fixed by the Government which were high. So 
and Another 
some of them, as appears from Annexure "A" to 
Sarkar J. 
Shri Jain's said affidavit, made the following sugges-
tions to the Government in March 1952 to give them 
relief: 
" (a) The price of cane be reduced to Re. 1 per 
maund. 
(b) The sugar manufactured from the lower priced 
cane be 'frozen' and kept as a national Reserve for 
Export or for such other purposes as the Government 
may consider desirable. 
(c) To reduce the accumulation of stocks in the 
factories and to make room for further storage, and to 
liquidate the stocks into cash, serious efforts be made 
either from Government to Government or through 
trade channels to export out at least 2 lakh tons: Alter-
natively, the State Governments be asked to take 
delivery of the quantities from the factories and store 
them in their own godowns. 
(d) If there is any 'profit' in the export of such 
quantities the same may be utilised either for giving a. 
'bonus' to the cane growers or in lowering the price of 
sugar for home consumption." 
It is clear from the suggestions thus made by the 
manufacturers that they wanted the burden on them 
to be relieved and export at Government's cost. In 
that year the Government in fact permitted an export 
of 10,000 tons and gave a subsidy of Rs. 2 per maund 
to cover the loss on the export. Later in the same 
year tho Government reduced the price at which the 
sugar manufacturers could purchase the cane. 
In the years 1952-53 to 1955-56 India imported large 
quantities of sugar and did not export sugar at all. 
It also appears that during these years the consumpt.ion 
of sugar in India was much more than the production. 
Hence, obviously the need for the import. So clearly 
in these years the sugar manufacturers did not need to 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
77 
export their sugar. The respondents do not say that 
x959 
during these years the sugar m~nufacturers had asked Tlie Lord Krishna 
for arrangements for export bemg made. 
1956-57 was S1t•ar Mills Ltd., 
the year of the Suez crisis. In this year a substantial 
:nd Another 
quantity was exported and large profits could be made 
. v. 
. 
because price of sugar in some of the markets abroad Tho Umon °1 India 
h d 
d 
th 
. . 
d b th 
~ 
•t 
1md Another 
a gone up ue to 
e crisis cause 
y 
e •:iuez s1 ua-
_ 
tion. The proposition then is that between 1952-53 
Sarkar J. 
and 1956-57 the industry was doing very well and had 
no need to ask for Government's intercession to enable 
it to export. 
There is no evidence that in 1957 -58 there was. any 
over-production. The figures for this year in tons are 
production-19,75,000, consumption-20,14,000 and 
export-50,000, the figure for export being that fixed 
under the Act. It appears however that various 
representatives of the Government and the sugar 
manufacturers met and decided upon the idea of export-
ing sugar for earning foreign exchange in Government's 
inkrest and getting a foothold in the world market in 
the int~rests of the manufacfurers. It was realised 
that the export would result in a loss but the manu-
facturers agreed to export provided they were allowed 
to make up the loss from the internal market. For 
this purpose the imggestion made as appears from 
annexute "D" to the affidavit of Shri Jain, was as 
follows: 
"The internal market will be Jen free as at present. 
However to provide an element of stability to the 
market releases for internal sale shall be regulated by 
Government of India in active consultation with the 
industry." 
So what the trade had agreed to was that they 
would be prepared to export sugar provided they were 
left free to recoup from the internal sales the loss 
caused by the export. This is very different from 
agreeing to the Act which made no provision for 
recouping the loss from the internal sales. The sugar 
manufacturers did not approve of the Act, being con-
tent to depend on the Government's sense of fair play 
to relieve the hardship caused by it. 
78 
SUPltEME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
There remains one other contention to deal with. 
Th< Lord Krishna It · 
'd th t th 
· t' 
bl 
' 
h 
5 
M .11 Lid 
1s sa1 
· a · 
e restrw 1011s are reason a e smce t ey 
"!:i A:o;h., ·· result in stabilising the sugar industry. Apart from 
v. 
saying that the Act would stabilise the sugar industry, 
The Union of India the affidavits used on behalf of the respondents do not 
and .1no1hu 
show how that would be done or that there was any 
Sarkar]. 
need for it. From what I have earlier stated it does 
not appear to me that the industry needed any stabi-
lisation. The figures given earlier show that produc-
tion has always been less than internal eonsumption, 
excepting for the year 1951-52. But it appears from 
one of the annexurcs to the affidavit of Shri Jain that 
even 'then the difficulty was only temporary. It is 
there stated : 
"Again in 1952-53 it was decided to export upto 
2 lakh tons. 
But only about 10,000 tons could be 
exported as in the meantime there was an appreciable 
rise in the sugar prices and the surplus stock was 
consumed in the home m>trket." 
The estimated figures for th11 Y'"" 19:38-59 in tons 
appear to be as follows: production-· 19,00,000 con-
sumption-21,00,000, export-1,00,000. It would thus 
appear that the sugar industry in India has always 
been stable and did not require any export to make it 
stable. 
What I think however puts the matter beyond 
tlou bt is s. 4 of the Act. 
Under that section, in fixing 
the total quantity of wgar to be exported in any 
season regard is to be had only to the quantity avail-
able in India, the quantity required for consumption 
in India and the necessity of earning foreign exchange. 
l:;o in deciding the quantity to be exported no question 
of stabilising the industry or prices arises. Again, it 
is not out of the excess of the production over the 
internal consumption alone that the exports are to be 
made. In fact there has never really been any excess 
of production over consumption requirements. Indeed 
it is plain that if sufficient sugar were left to meet the 
home consumption, then the. increased price would not 
help the industry to recoup the loss. If supplies were 
adequate to meet the demand the price cannot be 
forced up. 
' 
S.O.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
79 
I therefore come to the conclusion that the Act 
I 959 
which makes the petitioners suffer a loss on the sale The Lord Krishna 
of a part of their produce imposes a restriction on Sugar Mills Ltd., 
their right to carry on their business which cannot in 
and Another 
the circumstances of this case he said to be reasonable 
v. 1 
-~· 
d ' th 
" 
' 
l'd 
The Union o lnuia 
an 
IS · ereiore inva 1 • 
and Another 
I may also mention that the learned counsel for 
the petitioners had taken certain other objections to 
thP validity of the Act but in the view that I have 
earlier indicated I do not. consider it necessary to 
discuss the other objections. 
I would allow the petitions with costs. 
SuBBA RAO J.-J have had the advantage of 
SubbaRaof. 
perusing the judgment prepared by my learned 
brother, Hidayatullah, J. I agree with his conclusion 
but would prefer to give my own reasons. The only 
justification for me to write a separate judgment is my 
inability to persuade myself to agree with one of the 
reasons given by Hiday~tullah, J., for his conclusion. 
That reason involves a principle of far-reaching 
importance, namely, whether, in ascertaining the 
reasonableness of restrictions imposed by a statute on 
a fundamental right, it is permissible to rely upon a 
notification issued by Government in exercise of power 
conferred on it by another Act unconnected with the 
impugned one. · 
Before I embark upon the merits of the case it would 
be convenient at the outset to clear the ground by 
expressing my view on the said question. The facts 
of the case have been fully stated by my learned 
brother in his judgment, and I need not restate them 
except to notice a few relevant and material facts. The 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (Act 10 of 1955), was 
enacted for the purpose mentioned in the preamble to 
that Act. In exercise of the powers conferred by s. 3 
of the said Act, the Central Government issued an 
order dated August 27, 1955, called the Sugar(Control) 
Order, 1955. Under r. 5 of the said order, the Central 
Government is empowered, inter alia, to fix the price 
or the maximum price at which any sugar may be sold 
or delivered, having regard to the price or minimum 
80 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
' 959 
price fixed for sugar.cane, manufacturing cost, taxes, 
The Lord Kri>hna reasonable margin of profit for producer and/or trade, 
Sugar Mills Ltd., and any incidental charges. In exercise of powers con-
and Anothn 
ferred on the Central Government under s. 3 of the 
he 
. v. 
Ind. said Act and cl. 5 of the said order, the Central 
T 
a~;·~;:,~'"' '"Government issued a notification dated July 30, 1958, 
fixing the ex-factory price for Indian sugar Standard 
subba Rao J. 
(ISS) D-29 grade. A few days before the said order 
was issued i.e., on .June 27, 1958, the Central Govern-
ment promulgated an Ordinance called the Sugar 
Export Promotion Ordinance, and it was subsequently 
converted into an Act (30 of 1958), which received the 
assent of the President on September 16, 1958. It is 
said that the Central Government in fixing the price 
for sugar produced during the season 1957-58, in 
vacuum pan sugar factories situate in the areas speci-
fied in the order had taken into account the possible 
loss the exporters might incur by reason of the applica-
tion of the provisions of the impugned Act. Shri 
K. P. Jain, Chief Director in the Directorate of Sugar& 
Vanaspati, Ministry of Food and Agriculture (Depart-
ment of Food), in his affidavit says that the ex-factory 
price of sugar per maund fixed by the said order was 
made up of the following items: 
Average cost of production 
including margin of profit. 
Excise duty. 
Cane cess. 
Loss on exports. 
Total 
Rs. 22·91 
Rs. 10·70 
Rs. 
1·89 
Rs. 0·50 
Rs. 36·00 
It is explained therein that the factories are expected 
to realise actually on their internal sales Rs. 22·91 as 
their cost of production including margin of profit and 
Rs. 0·50 to cover losses of export which work out to 
approximately Rs. 10, per maund of sugar exported. 
For every one maund of sugar exported, the factories 
have for sale in the internal market 20 maunds of 
sugar, and on this, on account of the price fixed, they 
would realise 0·50 nP. per maund i.e., on 20 maunds 
Rs. 10, which covers the export loss. The effect of the 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
81 
said order is that the possible loss to the sugar export-
z959 
ers is off-set by the fact that they can recoup their 
l 
· 
h · · 
1 t d 
The Lord Krishna 
oss m t eir mterna ra e. 
5 
M'll Ltd 
ugar 
i s 
., 
The learned Attorney-General sought to justify the 
and Another 
restrictions imposed by the impugned Act , on the 
v. 
ground, among others, that the Court should rely upon The ,union °! India 
the said order in determining whether the restrictions 
and Another 
imposed by the impugned Act are reasonable within 
Subba Rao 1. 
the meaning of Art. 19 of the Constitution. In support 
of this contention, he relied upon the decision of this 
Qourt in State of Madras v. V. G. Row (1 ). That decision 
was concerned with the question whether s. 15(2)(b) of 
the Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (14 of 
1908), as amended by the Indian Criminal Law Amend-
ment (Madras) Act, 1950, was unconstitutional and 
void. It was contended in that case that the said 
provision fell within the limits of constitutionally 
permissible legislative abridgement of the fundamental 
right conferred on the citizens under Art. 19(l)(c) of 
the Constitution. The said limits are defined in cl. 4 
of the said article whereunder: 
"Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall 
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it 
imposes, or prevent the States from making any law 
imposing, in the interests of public order or morality, 
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right 
conferred by the said sub-clause." 
In discussing the said question, Patanjali Sastri, C.J., 
observed at p. 607 : 
" It is important in this context to bear in mind that 
the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should 
be applied to each individual statute impugned, and 
no abstract standard, or general pattern of reasonl:!oble-
ness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The 
nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, the 
underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed, the 
extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied 
thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the pre-
vailing conditions at the time, should all enter into the 
judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive factors 
(I) {1952]S.C.R. 597, 
II 
82 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)) 
'959 
and forming their own conception of what is reason-
-
able, in n,ll the circunrntn,nces of n, given case, it is 
The Lo•d J{,;sr.na . 
. l I 
h 
1 
. I 
I "l 
1 
d I 
I 
f 
Sug"' Mills Lid., 111ev1ta ' e t '1t ~ ie socm 
)J u osop iy. an . t 1e sea. e. o 
and Anvlher 
values Of the ]Udges partw1p1ttillg Ill tne deern1011 
v. 
should play an important part, mid the limit to their 
The Unfon of India interference with legislative judgment in such cases 
and Another 
can only be dictat.ed by their sense of responsibility 
and self-restraint 1tnd the sobering reflection that the 
Sublia Rao j. 
Constitution is meant not only for p<>ople of their way 
of thinking but for all, and that the mnjority of the 
elected representatives of the people have, in authoris-
ing the imposition of the restrictions, considered them 
to be reasonable." 
If I may say so with respect, this passage summarizes 
the law on the subject folly and precisely. "Vhat is 
reasonable in a pnrticular set-up may be unreasonable 
in a society with a different background. The learned 
Counsel relying upon the words "prevailing conditions" 
and the subsequent words "in all the circumstances of 
a given case" contai1rnd in the above observation of 
Patanjali Sastri, C. J., contended that the said words 
were comprehensive enough to take in notifications 
issued by the Government., and, therefore, the said 
order of the Central Government fixing the rate would 
be one of the elements to be taken into consideration 
in testing the reasmmbleness of the impugnl'd Act. 
I 
find it difficult to accept this <ugmnent. 
The learned 
Attorney-General has not been itble to place before us 
any decision which "·ent to the length of holding that 
such notifications could enter the judicial verdict. It 
is truii that the prevailing conditions at the time the 
Act was nmde should be taken into considt,ration, for 
the effectiveness of <1 restriction imposed for a parti-
cuhu purpose depends upon the said conditions. In a 
society addicted to opium, the legislature has to make 
a law imposing severe restrictions on the right to 
conwme the same. In a society where a particular 
vice i8 rampant, any restriction imposed to eradicate 
that Yi<>e has to be moulded in accordance with the 
needs of the time. During times of stress and strain, 
such as war or pestilence, greater restrictions may be 
imposed on a fundamental right to do business in 
-
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
83 
public interest. But the same restriction may be 
I959 
unreasonable in norm&l times. 
Even in normal times, The T.ord !( ri.>/ma 
the urgency of a social or economic reform, having sugar .lli!ls Ltd •• 
regard to the sub-normal stancfards of human existence, 
and Another 
may demand more stringent restrictions on funda-
v. 
mental rights than during times of prosperity. The The U 11i011 01 India 
l 
d Cl · f J 
· 
} 
f" 
· l • 
J · • l 
· 
a ud ~ not/1•r 
earnc 
ue 
ustice, t iere ore, m 11s grap uc t escrip-
· 
· 
tion of the test of reasonablenefi!s, in my view, was 
suhl>a Rao 1. 
not stating any thing more than the obvious, for the 
standard of reasonableness is inextricably conditioned 
by the state of society and the urgency for eradicating 
the evil sought. to be remedied. But I am clear in my 
mind that·the validity of an Act shall not be made to 
depend upon another Act unconnected with the 
impugned Act or power conferred thereunder, which 
.might, if properly exercised, off.set the evil tendency 
or the vice of the impugned Act. If the validity of 
an Act is made to depend upon such a foundation, a 
super-structure will have been built on shifting sands. 
To do that is to destroy the stability of legislation and 
to introduce an uncertain element therein. If two or 
more Acts were parts of the same scheme or plan, to 
implement the same or common objective, or if the 
impugned Act, though it was not originally conceived 
at the time when the earlier Act was passed, was only 
an extension or a further step by legislature for 
implementing the object of the earlier Act or if the 
legislature by express reference incorporated in the 
impugned Act the provisions of the earlier Act, it 
would be permissible to rely upon the said provisions 
of the earlier Act, not because they formed part of the 
prevailing ·conditions but because either the earlier 
Act formed part of the impugned Act by reference or 
both of them formed part of the same legislative plan. 
The illustrations are not exhaustive, but they all fall 
under one or other of the following two categories : 
(i) an earlier Act is made part of a new Act; and (ii) both 
Acts are parts of a legislative scheme or plan where 
both of them were conceived at the inception but 
passed in stages, or conceived at different times on the 
basis of experience gained but passed in furtherance 
of the same scheme. In such cases, the test of 
84 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
reasonableness in regard to one Act may be made to 
-
depend upon the impact of the other on it. But to go 
~~;;,
0
~,~;~:;.~ beyond_ this is to destroy t~e stability of legislation 
and Another 
and to mtroduce an uncertam element. To go further 
v. 
and to depend upon a notification of a transitory 
The Union of India nature issued under an unconnected Act is to place 
and Another 
the statute in a fluid state. In such a situation its 
validity would depend . upon a statutory order of 
Subba Rao 1· 
temporary duration; 4t would change colour with the 
changing attitudes of an authority empowered to issue 
the order. It would also mean that a Court will have 
to embark upon a roving search of all Acts and 
notifications which may, by design or accident, 
alleviate or mollify the evil consequences of an 
impugned Act. 
Such a result cannot be contemplated. 
The learned Attorney-General has not placed before us 
any decision in support of his broad propositian; but 
I find in the judgment of my learned brother, 
Hidayatullah, J., a few decisions which, it is said, go to 
the full length of supporting the argument of the 
learned Attorney-General. I have carefully perused 
the said decisions and I do not find anything said gr 
implied therein to support the said contention. The 
decision in Attorney-General for Alberta v. Attorney-
General for Ca:nada (1) was concerned with a conflict 
between the jurisdictions of the Dominion and Provin-
cial Legislatures under ss. 91 and 92 of the British 
North America Act, 1867, The Legislative Assembly 
of the Province of Alberta passed an Act respecting 
the taxation of banks' and imposed thereunder on 
every corporation or joint stock company other than 
the Bank of Canada, incorporated for the purpose of 
doing banking or savings bank business in the 
Province, an annual tax, in addition to any tax 
payable under any other Act. 
Defaulters of payment 
of tax were to be visited with penalties, and the 
payment of either tax or penalty could be enforced 
by distress and sale of goods and chattels, or by 
action for civil debt. 
It was contended before 
the Privy Council that the proposed taxation was 
not in its true sense taxation in order to the raising 
(I) (1939) A.C. II7. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
85 
of a revenue for Provincial purposes so as to be within 
r959 
the exclusive legislative competence of the Provipcial 
Legislature, but was merely part of a legislative plan The Lord Krishna 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
to prevent the operation within the Province of those 
and Another 
banking institutions which had been called into exist-
v. 
ence and given the necessary powers there to conduct The Union of India 
their business by the only proper authority, the 
and Another 
Parliament of the Dominion, under s. 91 of the British 
Subba Rao]. 
North America Act, and the Bill was therefore ultra 
vires the Provincial Legislature. The Privy Council 
accepted the contention. :For the purpose of ascertain-
ing the true plan underlying the bill, the Judicial 
Committee compared the relative legislative lists, took 
judicial notice of other Acts and the object and purpose 
of the Act in question. Having regard to the said 
consideration, it came to the conclusion that it was 
a colourable legislation aimed at to prevent the 
operation within the province of the aforesaid banking 
institutions. When a statute is attacked on the ground 
that it is a colourable legislation, i.e., it assumed a 
form apparently faliing within the legislative compet-
ence of the legislature but in effect and substance 
intended to reach institutions beyond its legislative 
competence, it is obvious that all the surrounding 
circumstances, including other acts operating in the 
Province, have to be scrutinized to unravel the fraud 
on power. This decision, in my view, cannot be 
invoked to serve the present purpose. Nor does the 
decision of the Judicial Committee in Lad,ore v. 
Bennett (1) carry the matter further. The question 
in that case was whether the Provincial legislation in 
question did not encroach upon the exclusive legis-
lative power of the Dominion Parliament in relation 
to bankruptcy and insolvency, interest or pr iv ate rights 
outside the Province. For ascertaining the pith. and 
substance of the impugned statutes, the Judicial 
Committee relied upon th.e report of the Royal 
Commission appointed to enquire into municipal and 
other affairs of the four municipalities in question. At 
p. 477, it is observed: 
" Their Lordships do not cite this report as 
evidence of the facts there found, but as indieating the 
(1) (1939) A.C. i68. 
86 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
materials which the (~overnment of the Province had 
--_ . 
before them before promot.ing in the Legislature the 
~Jte f.Ol'(i_.]\ nsJina ~t.atllte 110'-"' itll pugned." 
5,, .. ,,, M.tl.< Ud., Tl . 
d 
. 
. 
h 
l' l 
and Aavtlwr 
118 Cai"\C 
Of"S 
11ot, Ill ll1,V VJe\Y, t TO\Y R.11}' tg 1t Oil 
v. 
question raised in the present case. The decision of 
The i·uio11 of India the Privy Council in Pillrti v. J.lfudanayake( 1) is also 
""a Auntl•n 
not. of much relevance to the present case. 
The 
constitutional validity of the citizenshiJJ. Act, 1948, of 
S11h!m Rao J. 
-
Ceylon, was questioned in tlrnt case. It was contended 
therein that the main object of that Act was to prevent 
the Indian Tamils from obtaining citize1rnhip of Ceylon 
am! that the Act was part. of a plan to effect indirectly 
something \\·hich the legislature had no power to 
achit>\'e directly. The Judicial Committee pointed out, 
at p. 528: 
"It. must be shown ~iffirmatively by the party 
challenging a statute which is upon its face intra vires 
that it was e.nacted as part of phtn to effect indirectly 
something which the legislature had no power to 
achieve directlv." 
TJ1e Judicial Committee relied upon the Inclian and 
Pakistani R(•sidPnts (Citizenship) Act, Xo. 3 of 1949, 
by which an Indian Tamil would b.'' an application 
obtain citizenship by registration and thus protect his 
descendante, provided lH• lmd a eertain residential 
qualification. 
\Ylwn objection \\·as taken against the 
Court rel.ving upon the stiic! Act, their Lordships 
disallowed the objection \\·ith the following remarks, 
at p. 529: 
"If there was a legislati,-e plan the plan must be 
looked at as a whole, and when so looked at it is 
evident, in their Lordships, opinion, tlrnt. the legis-
lature did not intend to prevent Indian Tamils from 
attaining citizenship provided that they \\·ere suffi-
dently connected with the island." 
In this case also the reliance on a subsequent Act 
was only to unravel the pl\in attributed to the Legisla. 
ture of Ceylon to deprive the Indian Tamils of citizen. 
ship by passing the impugned Act. The said three 
decisions, therefore, are not, and cannot be, authorities 
for the proposition now contended. To unravel a plan 
(1) (1953) A.C. 514. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
87 
of fraud on powern, it would he necessary to scrutinize 
r959 
all the documents, whether legislative or otherwise, 
1 
1. 
T!te Lord I<ris!tna 
which hel1) to ascertain the truth. It may a so ue Sugar ;lfilts Ltd., 
necessary to look into another Act to ascertain the 
etnd Another 
pith and imbstance of an impugned Act. But the same 
v. 
principle cannot be invoked for a,scertaining the The Union of India 
reasonablenoHs of legislative restl'idiom; on fundarnen-
and .luot!tcr 
tal rights. 
subba Rao J. 
Now t·oming to the factR of the present case, it is not 
suggrRtcd that the Es;;;ential 
Commoditi~;;; Aet, 1955, 
and t.lw impugned Act form part of one scheme of 
legislation. Indeml the E;;;sential Commodities Act waH 
enacted to provide in the i11tore:-1t of the gen<:'ml publie 
for control of production, :rnpply and di:;trihution of, 
and trade and commerec in, certain commodities. The 
provisions of the Act di,;clo;;c that tho ohjcct of the 
Aet was to nrninta.in or to inerca,;e :mpplies of essential 
commoditir's and to secure their equitable di;;tribution 
and availability at fair prices. It was not one of itH 
objAct;;; to stimnlate foreign trarle or to earn foreign 
exchange. It is said that the notification issued by 
the Central Government under s. 3 of that Act and r. 5 
of the Order made thereunder was to off-;;et the loss 
expected to be incurred under the Ordinance, and 
therefore, the Act whi('h supplanted the Ordinance, 
must be deemed to have been pn,ssed on the basis of 
that notification. 
To put it in other words, though 
the impugned Aet docs not confer any power or imposn 
a duty on the Uoveriiment to off-set tlte·loss by fixing 
the rates of sugar, having regn,rd to the expected losR, 
the mere fact that it could fix the rn.tes mHkr Home 
other Act would make the Act good though otherwi;;;o 
bad. If this argument be accepted a:; correct., even if 
the notifioation was not issued, the existence of such a 
power under some other Act would be enough to 
validate the impugned Act, for, thongh the notifimt-
tion was not issued, it may be issued at n. laier siltgP. 
'l'his argmncnt, if accepted, would leave the im pngnl.'d 
statut.e . in it tl uid state, its validity or ot horwise 
depending upon the changing attitude of the authority 
concerned. I cannot, therefore, accept this rnntention. 
88 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
Let me now consider the reasonableness of the 
-
restrictions imposed by the Act, excluding the notifica-
The Lord Ifrishna t' 
. 
d b 
h 
G'' 
I 
. 
d 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 10n . issue 
y t e 
overnmen.t. 
t .is . enacte 
to 
and Another 
provide for the export of sugar m pubhc mterest, and 
v. 
for the levy and collection, in certain circumstances, 
The Union of India of an additional duty of excise on sugar produced in 
and Another 
India. Section 4 enables the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette to fix from time to 
Subb,-i Rao]. 
time the quantity of sugar which may be exported 
during any period, and, in fixing such quantity, the 
Central Government 
should have regard to the 
quantity of sugar available in India, the quantity of 
sugar which, in its opinion, would be reasonably 
required for consumption in India, and the necessity 
for exporting sugar with a view to earning foreign 
excl;iange in the public interest. In exercise of that 
power, the Central Government should not fix the 
quantity of sugar for export as to exceed in any year 
in the aggregate twenty per cent. of the quantity of 
sugar prorlnced in India in the season ending wit.h the 
month of October falling within that year. Under s. 5, 
the Central Government is empowered to apportion 
the quantity of sugar fixed from time to time for. 
purposes of export under s. 4 among the owners in 
proportion to the quantity of sugar produced, or likely 
to be produced, by them respectively during the season 
referred to above. :'-iection 6 enjoins on the owners of 
sugar factories to deliver to the export agency, 
appointed under the Act, the sugar produced in their 
factories in such quiintities, of such grade, in such 
manner, within such time and iit such place, as may 
be specified hy the export agency in that behalf. 
When such delivery is made, the owner ceases to have 
any more right over the sugar except to receive 
payment ·therefor. Section 8 empowers the export 
agency, after taking delivery, to export the sugar or 
permit the owner to sell the whole or any part of the 
export quota in his custody at a price approved by it 
on condition that the sale-proceeds are payable to it. 
Section 9 directs the export agency to make payments 
to the owners, who had delivered sugar to it, in the 
manner prescribed by the section. Out of the total 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
89 
sale-proceeds, the total expenditure incurred by the 
z959 
export agency in respect of the sugar exported should 
--
b d d 
d 
d l 
b 1 
h 
ld b 
· 
d The Lord Krisllna 
e e ucte 
an tie a ance s ou 
e apport1one 
5 , 
M'lt Ltd 
h 
. 
• 
h 
t" 
f 
"~ar 
' s 
., 
among t e owners m proportion to t e quan 1ty o 
and Another 
sugar delivered by them for export during the year. 
v. 
It also enables the export agency to make payments TkUnion of India 
to owners on account against documents of delivery of 
and Another 
sugar furnished by them, and to adjust such payments 
Sub;;;: Rao J. 
at the time of final payment. Section 10 confers 
power on the Central Government to give directions 
to the export agency in discharge of its functions 
under the Act. Section 7 deals with a situation when 
the ~ugar is not delivered, and it reads: 
"S. 7(1): Where sugar delivered by any owner 
falls short of the export quota fixed for it by any 
quantity (hereinafter referred to as the said quantity), 
there shall be levied and collected on so much of the 
sugar despatched from the factory for consumption in 
India as is equal to the said quantity, a duty of excise 
at the rate of seventeen rupees per maund." 
Sub-ss. 2, 3 and 4 provide for a 
machinery for 
imposing the penal duty and collecting the same from 
the defaulting owners of sugar. The scheme of the 
Act, therefore, is a self.contained one. The object is 
to provide for the export of sugar in the interest of 
public and that object is sought to be achieved by 
fixing the quota of sugar for export and distributing 
the same among the owners of factories; subject to the 
condition that in no case it should exceed twenty per 
cent. of the quantity of sugar produced in India in a 
particular season. The quantity is also fixed \vit.hout 
detriment to the requirements for internal consump-
tion. The apportionment of the quota among the 
various factories is objectively and impartially made. 
The quota delivered, or in case the owner is allowed to 
sell the sugar himself, the sugar purchased from the 
sale-proceeds, is· exported, and the nett sale-proceeds 
are distributed among the owners in proportion to the 
quantity of sugar delivered by them for export. The 
Act enables the Government to make payments on 
account. 
The Government also retains an over-all 
12 
90 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
, 959 
control presumably to see that no injustiee is done to the 
parties concerned. The short question is whether the 
Th• Lord Krishna said restrictions on the freedom of the petitioners to 
Sngar Milts Ltd .• acquire, hold and dispose of property, and carry on 
and Anoth.e1 
v. 
trade or business, are reasonable within the meaning of 
Th• Unfon of India clauses (5) and (6) of Art. 19 of the Constitution. The 
and Anoth<r 
restrictions must have a reasonable relation to the 
object which the legislature seeks to achieve and must 
Subba Rao f. not go in excess of that object. What is the object of 
the legislature ? The object of the legislature is to 
provide for the export of sugar in public interest. It 
cannot be, and indeed it is not, denied that at the 
time the Act was passed there was a sincere and serious 
national effort to industrialize our country with the 
avowed object of raising the economic standards of 
our people. 
One of. the necessary conditions for 
industrializing our eountry is to start heavy industries, 
and that cannot be done unless the country earn8 
foreign exchange to enable it to import plants for 
starting the same. It is also self-evident that it would 
be in the interests of sugar industry to build up a 
foreign market for that commodity. The object of the 
Act was, therefore, demorrntrably to serve the national 
interest and the scheme evolved certainly had relation 
to the object sought to he achieved, for all the pro-
visions of the Act were conceived in :t glmuine attempt 
to induce foreign export in sugar by co-operative effort. 
If so, the only ohjcetion to t.he rnstrictions imposed 
can be on the basis that the fr••edom w11,s abridged or 
curtailed unduly or arhitmrily. 
But for the Act, the 
petitioners could have Kold their sugar in the open 
market without exceeding the rnkK fix.,d under the 
Essential Commodities Act, l!.J!i5. The correspondence 
filed in the case, marked '" 1tn11exures A, H and C, 
clearly demonstrates that both the irnlustry :i.s well as 
the 8tate were equally interested to stimulate foreign 
trade and build up a foreign market. Under the 
scheme embodied in the Act, three restrictions are 
imposed on the owners of factories: (i) They must 
contribute to the stock for export,. not exceeding 
twenty per cent. of the quantity produced in their 
factories; (ii) they are paid only their proportionate 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
91 
share of the nett sale-proceeds realised in the foreign 
r959 
market; and (iii) a penal cess is imposed on those 
-
. 
who make default in supplying the goods. When once The Lord Krishna 
. . 
d d h t h A t 
. 
h 
, 
l ·. t 
Sugar Mills Ltd., 
it is conce e t a t e 
c serves t e nat10na m erest, 
and Another 
I find it not possible to hold that the restrictions 
v. 
are unreasonable or excessive. The three restrictions The Union of India 
are really the props of the scheme. If there was no 
and Another 
statutory compulsion on the owners of factories to 
l 
bl f 
· 
f th 
d 
d . 
Subbn Rao], 
supp y a reasona e ract1on o 
e sugar pro uce 
m 
their factories, the export agency would not get the 
requisite quantity of sugar for export. If there was 
no provision imposing a penal cess on defaulters, 
there would be no sanction to compel them to deliver 
their quota of sugar. Though the final payment was 
deferred till the nett sale-proceeds were realised, they 
would be paid the price for the sugar supplied, at the 
rates fetched in the foreign market. It is common 
case that at present the export trade in sugar ends in 
loss; but it cannot be predicated that it will be a 
chronic feature and there will not come a time. when 
the export trade in sugar will earn profits. It may be 
that a better scheme migl).t have been evolved by the 
legislature or it might be more beneficial from the 
standpoint of owners of factories if t.he State purchas-
ed the exportable <1uantity for ready cash and exported 
the same on its own account. But it is not for this 
Court to evaluate the comparative merits of different 
schemes so long it is satisfied that the scheme actu-
ally evolved stands the test of reasonabless. The 
correspondence between the State and the industry 
shows that the industry as a whole co-operated with 
the State in evolving the scheme, which culminated in 
the passing of the Act. The State as well as the 
industry are equally interested to stimulate foreign 
trade and build up foreign market. To capture foreign 
market or to have a substantive share therein is not 
an easy task, as it depends upon many imponderables, 
namely, the availability of sugar, its demand, its 
comparative ID;erit,s with the sugar produced in other 
markets, transport facilities, mutual agreement requift 
ments, international affiliations etc. 
Initial loss 
must have to be borne to get a ~oothold and the clear 
92 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
z959 
objective will have to be pursued purposrifully and tena-
-
. 
ciously. To achieve the said objective, with the consent 
The Lord Krishna of the industry and on the basis of past experience, 
S<1gar Mills Ltd •• th A t 
d b th p 
l" 
t 
Th b 
fi . 1 
and Another 
e 
c was passe 
y 
e ar 1amen . 
e ene ma 
v. 
results flowing from the Act are significant. The 
The Union of India State earns foreigu exchange, and a foreign market is 
and Another 
gradually built up for the future prosperity of the 
sugar industry. 
Subba Rao]. 
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents 
an attempt was made to support the Act on the 
ground that it was intended to serve a dual purpose 
of stablising the internal market and earn foreign 
exchange for the country. An attempt was also 
made to link the one with the other, but the learned 
Attorney-General did not pursue that line in his 
argument, and I have, therefore, considered the ques-
tion only from the st.andpoint of the compelling need 
of the State to earn foreign exchange, and the long 
range aim of the industry to build up a foreign market. 
I therefore, hold that the restrictions imposed by the 
statute on the furnlamental rights of the petitioners 
are not arbitrary, and .are reasonable within the mean-
ing of Art. 19 of the Constitution. 
I agree with my learned brother, Hidayatullah, J., 
on the other questions raised in this case. In the 
result, the petitions are dismissed with costs. 
ORDER. 
In view of the opinion of the majority these peti-
tions are dismissed with costs. 
