S.C.R. 
93 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
NARAYANDAS BHAGWANDAS :MADHAVDAS 
v. 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL 
(JAFAR IMAM and J. L. KAPUR, JJ.) 
Criminal TriaJ,-Cognizance of a11 offence, when taken-lssui'!g 
of search warrant and warrant of arr~st, if amount to taking cogniz-
ance-Attempt-ing to tahe rnrrency notes out of India-Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, r947 (VII of r947), ss. r9(3) and 23(3). 
Code of Criminal, Procedure, r898 (V of r898), ss. r53, r55, 200-203 
and 204. 
On September 7, 1952, the appellant went to Dum Dum 
Aerodrome to board a plane for Hong Kong. On his search by 
the customs authorities a sum of Rs. 25,000 was recovered from 
him which he had not declared in his declaration form and for 
which he had no permit from the Reserve Bank of India for 
taking out of India. On September II, 1952, the Reserve Bank 
authorised Inspector Mitra to move the Additional District 
Magistrate, 24 Parganas under s. 19(3) of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, for permission to proceed against the appellant. 
On September 16, 1952, Mitra applied to the Magistrate for a 
search warrant and for a warrant of arrest and both warrants 
were issued. The appellant was arrested and released on bail 
with a direction to appear before the Magistrate on September 19. 
On September 19, the Magistrate granted bail to the appellant 
but refused him exemption from personal attendance before the 
Court and granted time· till November 19, 1952, for completing 
the investigation. This time was extended upto January 2, 1953 
and then upto February 2, 1953. In the meantime on Jantiary 27, 
1953, Mitra was authorised under I>· 23(3)(b) of the Act to file 
a complaint against the app'ellant. The complaint was filed on 
February 2, 1953, before the Additional District Magistrate who 
transferred the case to a Magistrate I Class for trial. On the same 
day the Magistrate I Class recorded the presence of the appel-
lant, allowed his application for reduction of security and fixed 
March 26, and 27, 1953· for evidence. 
Upon conclusion of the 
triai the Magistrate acquitted the appellant but on appeal the 
Calcutta High Court convicted him. The agpellant contended 
that the entire trial was without jurisdiction as the Magistrate 
had taken cognizance of the offence on September 16, 1952, 
without there being a complaint in writing by a person autho-
rised as required by s. 23(3) of the Act. 
Held, that cognizance of. the offence was taken by the 
Additional District Magistrate on February 2, 1953, after the 
complaint had been filed and the trial was valid. As to when 
cognizance is taken of an offence will depend upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
Mere issuing of a search warrant or 
warrant of arrest for the purposes of investigation did not, by 
I959 
May7. 
I959 
l\'arayand,1s 
Bliagwandrt.'i 
Jl/adluH'das. 
v. 
TJie State of 
JVest lJ1J1;gal 
/1nrim ]. 
.94 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1 )] 
themselves, amount to taking of cognizance. Cognizance was 
taken when a Magistrate applied his mind for the purpose of 
proceeding under s. 200 and subsequent sections of Ch. X\~I of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure or under s. 204 of Ch. XVII of 
the Code. 
In the present case cognizance was taken 'vhen on 
February 2, 1953, the Additional District Magistrate applied his 
mind to the case \vith a vie\\' to issuing a process and sent the 
case for trial to another magistrate. 
Suj>eri11h'1ultn! 
a11d I?enictnbrancer of J_egal A.flairs, 11·rest 
Bengal \'. Abani Knmar llancrji, A.LR. (1950) Cal. 437 and 
R. R. Cliari \'. The State of Uttar Pradesh, [r95r} S.C.R. 312, 
applied. 
The facts found clearly cstablishe<l that tho appellant 
atte1npted to take out of India the currency notes in question, 
and such attc1npt \Vas also an offence. 
l'he I-ligh Court had 
rightly rejected his explanation that he had applied tQ the 
l~eserve J--\llnk for a pennit to take the currency notes out of 
India and that as the permit had not been received he hacl 
fiandL~d o\·er the 
nott~s to the customs authorities for safe 
custocly. 
Cm:vl!XAL 
APPELLATE 
.fuRISDTCTJON: 
Criminal 
Appeal Xo. 12 of 19:37. 
Appeal from the judgment antl ortler dated Septem-
ber ;), l!J56, of the Calcutta High Court. in Govern-
ment Appeal Xo. 7of1954, arising out of the judgment 
and order dated April 3, 1954, of the Court of 1st Class 
~lagistrate :tt Aliporn. 
18hwar Lol C. Dalal and J. N. Shroff, for the 
app<,lJnnt. 
Ji . .J. fhn,.iyar and R. 11. Dhebar, for the respondent. 
HIGH. 
}Tl1.Y 7. 
The .Juclgmcnt of the CoJ1rt was 
cldivered by 
hlA\I .T.-This is an appeal on a curtificatfl granted 
liy the ( 'rileutt:t High Court. 
Two points have heen 
urged l>efor" the Bc11ch of tlw High Court which 
granted the certific:tte. The first W'1S that the search 
condu<:ted hy tho CustomH ofti<:ials whidt had resulted 
in the det<:etiou of the e111Tc1wy notes on the person 
of the appellant had not ]icon a legal search l1nd eon-
xe<pwntly 
110 pr()(:cedingx <"oul<l he baHed on the 
)JUl'f"'rted detection made. ThiH point was r!'jodml hy 
tlw Bo1J(·h. 
The second point urged on hchalf of the 
appl'llant was that on 8eptember · 16, 1952, when the 
·S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
95 
Magistrate issued the warrant of arrest against the 
appellant he could not have done so without having 
previously taken congnizance of the offence. 
Since, 
however, the authorization required under s. 23(3) 
of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (VII of 1947) 
was not obtained till January 27, 1953, the cognizance 
taken by the Magistrate on September 16, 1952, was 
without jurisdiction. If the initiation of the proceed-
ings was without jurisdiction, the conviction could not 
stand. The High Court thought that the contention of 
the appellant raised a question of law and granted the 
requisite certificate for appeal to this Court. 
The prosecution case was that on September 7, 1952, 
the appellant went to Dum Dum Aerodrome with a 
view to boarding a plane for Hong Kong. 
The plane 
was due to leave the airport at 8-30 a.m. The appel-
lant had to go through the customs formalities before 
he could board the plane. On an enquiry by the 
Customs Officers as to w hct her he had any other 
articles besides what he had declared in the declara-
tion form, the appellant answered in the negative. 
His baggage was then examined but no objectionable 
article was detected therein. The Cwitoms Officers, 
however, noticed a pouch of somewhat unusual -size· 
which aroused their suspicion. 
Thereafter, the appel-
lant was subjected to personal search. When they 
were about to search his person he let drop his 
trousers. The appellant was requested to lift up the 
trousers and wear them again which he did. On the 
search of the trousers a sum of Rs. 25,000 in Indian 
currency notes was discovered in two secret pockets. 
They were concealed from below the surface and 
opened from the inside. On September 11, 1952, the 
Reserve Bank of India authorized Inspector S. B. 
Mitra of the Special Police Establishment, Calcutta, to 
make a representation to the Additional District 
Magistrate, 24 Parganas (hereinafter referred to as the 
Addtiona1 District Magistrate) for 
permission to 
proceed against the appellant as required under 
s. 19(3) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
Mitra thereupon applied to the Additional District, 
Magistrate on September 16, 1952, for a search warrant 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
JY!adltavda< 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
I959 
Narayundas 
Bhagwandiis 
.'M adhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West ·ncng{il 
I1na1n]. 
96 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
to be issued which was allowed. 
Mitra on the same 
date also applied to the same Magistrate that a 
warrant of arrest might be issued against the appel-
lant. This was also allowed and a warrant of arrest 
was issued by the Additional District Magistrate and 
appellant was thereafter :irrested and released on bail 
with a direction to a ppcnr before the Additional Dis-
trict Magistrate on Septmnber 19. On September 19, he 
was released on bail by the Additional District Magis-
trate in the sum of Rs. 50,000 with 10 sureties of 
Rs. 5,000 each. On November 19, the appellant asked 
for exemption from atteri<ling the court on the succes-
sive dates fixed for the ease but the application was 
refused. On January 27, 1953, the Reserve Bank of 
India ftuthorized i\litra to filn a com plftint against the 
appellant. On :U'ehruary 2, 1953, a complaint was filed 
against the appellant charging him with an offence 
nnder s. 8(2) of the :Foreign Exchange Hegulation Act 
real'.l with s. 19 of the Sea ( \1stoms Act and Notification 
No. FERA 105/55 H.B, <lated February 27, 1951. 
Thereafter, the appellant was tried by another 
Magistrate, Mr. Sinha, who acquitted him under s. 258 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The currency 
notes which hn.d been seized by the Customs Officials 
were directed to be relassed. 
Against the appellant's 
acquittal the State of \Vest Bengal preferred an 
ttppeal to the High Court. The High Court allowed 
the appeal and convicted the appellant of the offence 
with which he had b;;en charged. He was sentenced 
to pay a fine of Rs. l,OOQ, in default to suffer rigorous 
imprisonment for three months. The order of the 
Magistrate directing the release of the currency notes 
was set aside. 
The main submission made on hehalf of the 
appellant before 11s has been that the Additional 
l>istric:t Magistrate Jrnving taken congnizance of the 
offonee on l'cpt.em her Hl, 1952, and as the provisions of 
s. 23(:l) of the For<,ign Exc:hange Regulation Act had 
not hcmn <:ompliccl with, the Pntire proceedings before 
him an cl I he i\lagistrafo who tried the case were wit.bout 
jurisclietion. 
The subsequent aut:horization hy the 
ltescrvc Bank on January 27, l!J53, and the filing of 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
97 
the complaint on February 2,1953,could not make legal 
proceedings which had already commenced without 
jurisdiction. It was also urged that the facts found 
did not attract the provisions of s. 19 of the Sea Cus-
toms Act (8 of 1878) as it could not be said that at the 
moment the appellant was searched by the Customs 
Officials, he was taking out of India across any customs 
frontier as defined by the Central Government the cur-
rency notes in question. It was also urged that explana-
tion offered by the appellant was accepted by the 
trying Magistrate and the High Court ought not to 
have set aside the acquittal of the appellant, there 
being no good ground why his explanation should not 
have been accepted. 
The version of the appellant as to how the sum of 
Rs. 25,000 in currency notes was with him was that 
he was not searched at all at the Customs barrier. He 
had taken out the currency notes in question from his 
trouser pocket and handed over the same to the Cus-
toms Officers stating the circumstances under which 
he was carrying the same on his person and asked for 
a receipt. The Customs Officers instead of giving him a 
receipt falsely charged him with smuggling the currency 
notes out of India without any permit. According to 
the appellant, he had applied to the Reserve Bank of 
India at Calcutta for a permit and had sent an a pplica-
tion for that purpose to one Joshi in Calcutta. 
He 
failed to receive the permit upto the last moment. 
His intention was to hand over the money to the Cus-
toms Officers for safe custody. In other words, the 
appellant's version, in substance, was that as he had 
failed to get the permit upto the last moment he vol-
untarily handed over the currency notes in question to 
the Customs Officers at the customs barrier· for safe 
keeping. He had at no time any intention to carry 
out of India the said currency notes without a permit. 
This version of the appellant was accepted by the try-
ing Magistrate who acquitted him. The High Court, 
however, did not accept his version. 
It was urged that the appeal is before us on a certific-
ate apd as the High Conrt had come to a different 
I~ 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
'959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The Stale of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
98 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
fiinding on a question of fact to what the trying Magi-
strate had found, it was open to the appellant to urge 
that he was entitled to question the findings of the 
High Court. It is true that the High Court has taken 
a different view to that taken by the trying Magistrate 
and has rejected the appellant's case that he had vol-
untarily handed over the currency notes in question to 
the Customs Officers in the circumstances mentioned 
by him and that he had no intention to take that 
money out of India without a permit. 
Nonetheless, 
the finding of the High Court is on a question of fact. 
We can see no particular reason in this case to go be-
hind the findings of fact arrived at by the High Court. 
The High Court gave very good reasons for accepting 
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses as to the 
circumstiinces in which the currency notes in question 
were recovered from the appellant when his person was 
searched. An important circumstance which might 
have supported the appellant's case, namely whether 
he had applied to the Reserve Bank of India for a per-
mit to take out of India currency notes to the extent 
of Rs. 25,000 was considered by the High Court. 
It 
found, on the evidence of the Superintendent of the 
Reserve Bank, that the Reserve Bank received no 
application from the appellant before September 7, 
1952, nor had the Reserve Bank granted the permission 
to the appellant to take any currency notes out of India. 
It was on September 16, that the Reserve Bank had 
received an application of the appellant forwarded by 
one G.C. ,Joshi by his letter dated September 15, 1952. 
The 
application of the appellant bore the date 
September 2, 1952. 
The High Court thought that 
there were grounds for suspecting that this applic-
ation was- antedated. 
The High Court came to the 
conclusion that there was no evidence to show; that 
any such application was writen or submitted on Sep-
tember 2, 1952. It does seem extraordinary that if 
the appellant had sent the application to Joshi on 
September 2, 1952, that Joshi should not have sent on 
that application to the Reserve Bank till September 15, 
1952. It is to be remembered that the incident had 
already taken place on September 7, 1952, and in that 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
99 
connection on September 15 and 16, 1952, Inspector 
Mitra of the Special Police Establishment, Calcutta 
had applied for a search warrant and a warrant i;if ar-
rest respectively against the appellant. On arrest, under 
the terms of that warrant he was released on bail by 
the police with a direction to appear before the court on 
September 19. 
The appellant had therefore ample 
opportunity to concoct an application for a permit after 
September 7, and to antedate it getting Joshi on Sep-
tember 15, 1952, to forward the same to the Reserve 
Bank. It is inconceivable that a person who was leav-
ing for Hong Kong and wished to carry such a large 
sum of money as Rs. 25,000 in currency notes would 
have applied on September 2, when he was actually to 
fly on September 7, 1952. Further it would not be 
unreasonable to suppose that the appellant would have 
so timed his arrival at Calcutta as would have enabled 
him to make the necessary enquiries from Joshi or the 
Reserve Bank whether the permit asked for had been 
granted. It is impossible to believe that he had arrivea 
at Calcutta and had gone direct to the Dum Dum Aero-
drome without making any enquiry from Joshi at least 
whether the permit asked for had been granted. Norm-
a.lly one would expect the appellant to reach Calcutta. 
in sufficient time to make the necessary enquiries 
and in the absence of a permit having been granted to 
have left the currency notes for safe custody with Joshi 
or some other trusted person. It is an entirely unaccept-
able story which the appellant put forward that he 
waited upto the last moment at the aerodrome for the 
necessary permit and not having got it requested the 
Customs Officers to keep the currency notes for safe 
custody. It is significant that the appellant did not 
examine Joshi as a witness in support of his case. It is 
not uv!ikely that if he had done so some inconvenient 
results would have followed in consequence of.close 
questioning of Joshi regarding' the entire transaction. 
We have, therefore, no reason to think that the High 
Court had erred in suspecting that the application to 
the Reserve Bank was antedated. On this finding it 
is apparent that the very foundation of the defence of 
the appellant is false. That the appellant did not hand 
r959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
I959 
1'.' arayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam] 
100 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
over the currency notes of Rs. 25,000, at the customs 
barrier but was searched when the customs formalities 
were gone through is not only deposed to by a number 
of witnesses holding responsible positions but is deposed 
to by P.\V. 4, Panna Lal Dey, Money Exchanger of 
Dum Dum Airport. Panna Lal Dey's evidence was 
accepted by the High Court and after having examined· 
his evidence we are satisfied that there is no reason to 
distrust his testimony. Reference has been made to 
some of the evidence on a question of fact in order to 
satisfy omselves whether the finding of the High Court 
was correct. We are satisfied that the finding of the 
High Court is the only view which could reasonably 
be taken in a case like this. 
It is true that the appellant had not taken the 
currency notes in question out of India across any 
customs frontier as defined by the.Central Government. 
He had, however, clearly attempted to take the same 
out of India. In such a case no question of his crossing 
the customs frontier arises. That an attempt to take 
out the currency notes in question is an offence 
punishable under the Sea Customs Act is clear from 
the provisions of s. 167, Item 8. The Foreign Exchange 
Regulation (Amendment) Act l!J52 (VIII of 1952), came 
into force in :February 1952. By this Acts. 23B was 
introduced into the Foreign ExC'hange Regulation Act. 
Section 23B makes punishable an attempt to con-
travene the proYisions of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act or any rule, direction or order made 
thereunder. Furthermore, this point was not taken 
before the Bench which granted the certificate of 
fitness for appeal to this Court. Be that as it may, tlie 
facts found clearly established that the appellant 
attempted to take out of India the currency notes in 
question. He -had entered the customs enclosure and 
had signed the declaration form. 
He had been 
questioned as to whether he had any other article than 
those mentioned in the declaration form which he 
wished to declare and he had answered in the negative. 
On his personal search he dropped his trousers on the 
ground. He was asked to pick up his trousers and 
wear them again. On search of the trousers Rs. 25,000, 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
101 
in currency notes were found concealed in the inner 
pockets. The appellant had his ticket to procf.led to 
Hong Kong by a plane which was due to leave Dum 
Dum Airport at 8-30 a.m. and the customs formalities 
were done in connection with that flight. If the 
appellant had successfully cleared himself from the 
customs formalities all that•was left for him to do was 
to board the plane which would take him 011t of India. 
These circumstances establish beyond all reasonable 
doubt that the act of the appellant had gone beyond 
the stage of preparation and was clearly an attempt to 
carry the sum of Rs. 25,000, in currency notes out of 
India without a permit from the Reserve Bank. We 
cannot accept the argument made on his behalf that 
the act of the appellant, on the fact~ found, amounted 
merely to preparation 11.nd not an attempt. 
The main submission on behalf of the appellant was 
directed towards establishing that the entire proceed: 
ings before the Additional District Magistrate and the 
trying Magistrate were without jurisdiction as cogniz-
ance of the offence had been taken on September 16, 
1952, in contravention of the provisions of s. 23(3) of 
the ]foreign Exchange Regulation Act, there being on 
that date no complaint in writing made by an officer 
authorised in that behalf by the Central Government 
or the Reserve Bank of India by a general or a special 
order. It is, therefore, necessary to'see, in the circum-
stances of the present case, on what date cognizance of 
the offence was taken. In order to ascertain this certain 
provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act 
and the Code of Criminal Procedure will require con-
sideration. Under s. 19(3) of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act a District Magistrate or Magistrate of 
the first class may, on a representation in writing m.ade 
by a person authorized in this behalf by the Central 
Government or the Reserve Bank and having reasons 
to believe that there had been contravention of any of 
the provisions of that Act, issue a search warrant. 
Inspector Mitra was so authorized by the Reserve Bank 
tm September 11, 1952, and in pursuance of that 
authorization applied to the Additional District 
Magistrate for the issue of a ·search warrant. Under 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The Stal~ of 
West Bengal 
Imam/. 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bllagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
102 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1960(1)] 
this section the search warrant is issued for the pur-
poses of conducting investigation under that Act. On 
September 16, Mitra applied for a warrant of arrest 
against the appellant. This application was obviously 
made under the Criminal Procedure Code. The offence 
which the appellant id alleged to have committed was a 
non-cognizable offence. Under s. 155(2) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, no police officer shall investigate 
a non-cognizable offence without the order of a Magi-
strate of the first or second class having power to try 
such a case or commit the same for trial, or of a Presid-
ency 
Magistrate. 
Inspector 
Mitra's 
application 
definitely states that he in asking for permission to 
investigate a non-cognizable offence under s. 155, 
Cr. P.C. The order of the Additional District Magistrate 
directing the issue of a search warrant and the word 
" permitted " contained t,herein we consider, in the 
context of the application, to mean that he granted 
the sanction for investigation as asked for. 
Under 
s. 155(3) of the Code a police officer being permitted to 
investigate a non-cognizable offence may exercise the 
same powers in respect of the investigation as an officer 
incharge of a police station may exercise in a cogniz-
able case, e}\,cept that he has not the power to arrest 
without a warrant. It was necessary therefore for 
Inspector Mitra to obtain from the Additional District 
Magistrate a warrant of arrest. It is clear, therefore, 
that upto September 16, 1952, the Additional District 
Magistrate had not taken cognizance of any offence. 
On September 19, 1952, the appellant appeared 
before the Additional District Magistrate who recorded 
the following order :-
" He is to give bail of Rs. 50,000 with ten sureties 
of Rs. 5,000 each. Seen Police report. Time allowed 
till 19th November, 1952, for completing investigation." 
On November 19, 1952, on perusal of the police 
report the Magistrate allowed further time for investiga-
tion until January 2, 1953, and on that date time was 
further extended to February 2, 1953. In the mean-
time, on January 27, 1953, Inspector Mitra had been 
authorized under s. 23(3)(b) of the ]foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act to file a complaint. Accordingly, a. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
103 
complaint was filed on February 2, 1953. The Additional 
District Magistrate thereon recorded the following order: 
"Seen the complaint filed to day against the 
accused Narayandas Bhagwandas Madhavdas under 
section 8(2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act 
read with Section 23B thereof read with Section 19 of 
the Sea Customs Act and Notification No. ]'.E.R.A. 
105/51 dated the 27th February, 1951, as amended, 
issued by the Reserve Bank of India under Section 
8(2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. Seen the 
letter of authority. To Sri M. N. Sinha, S.D.M. (Sadar), 
Magistrate 1st class (spl. empowered) for favour of dis-
posal according to law. Accused to appear before him." 
Accordingly, on the same date Mr. Sinha then 
recorded the following order :-
" Accused present. Petition filed for reduction of 
bail. Considering all facts, bail granted for Rs. 25,000 
with 5 sureties. 
To 26th March, 1952 and 27th March, 1952 for 
evidence." 
It is clear from these orders that on September 19, 
1952, the Additional District Magistrate had not taken 
cognizance of the offence because he had allowed the 
police time till November 19, 1952, for completing the 
investigation. By his subsequent orders time for 
investigation was further extended until February 2, 
1953. On that date the complaint was filed and the 
order of the Additional District Magistrate clearly 
indicated that he took cognizance of the offence and 
sent the case for trial to Mr. Sinha. It would also 
appear from the order of Mr. Sinha that if the Ad-
ditional District Magistrate did not take cognizance, he 
certainly ciid because he considered whether the bail 
should be reduced and fixed the 26th and 27th of 
March, for evidence. It was, however, argued that 
when Mitra applied for a search warrant on Septem-
ber, 16, 1952, the Additional District Magistrate had 
recorded an order thereon, " Permitted. Issue search 
warrant." It was on this date that the Additional 
District Magistrate took cognizance of the offence. We 
cannot agree with this submission because the petition 
of Inspector Mitra clearly states that " As this is non-
cognize.ble offence, I Pf.!LY that you will kindly permit 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The Stale of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
104 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
me to investigate the case under section 155 Cr. P. C." 
That is to say, that the Additional District Magistrate 
was not being asked to take cognizance of the offence. 
He was merely requested to grant permission to the 
police officer to investigate a non-cognizable offence. 
The petition requesting the Additional District. Magi-
strate to issue a warrant of arrest and his order directing 
the issue of such a warrant cannot also be regarded 
as orders which indidate that the Additional District 
Magistrate thereby took cognizance of the offence. It 
was clearly stated in the petition that for the purposes 
of investigation his presence was necessary. The step 
taken by Inspector Mitra was merely a step in the 
investigation of the case. He had not himself the 
power to make an arrest having regard to the provi-
sions of s. 155(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
In order to facilitate his investigation it was necessary 
for him to arrest the appellant and that he could not 
do without a warrant of arrest from the Additional 
District Magistrate. As already stated, the order of 
the Additional District Magistrate of September 19, 
1952, makes it quite clear that he was still regarding 
the matter as one under investigation. It could not be 
said with any good reason that the Additional District 
Magistrate had either on September 16, or at any sub-
sequent date upto February 2, 1953, applied his ·mind to 
the case with a view to issuing a process against the 
appellant. 
The appellant had appeared before the 
Magistrate on February 2, 1953, and the question of 
issuing summons to him did not arise. The Additional 
District Magistrate, however, must be regarded as 
having taken cognizance on this date because he sent 
the case to Mr. Sinha for trial. There was no legal 
bar to the Additional District Magistrate taking cogniz-
ance of the offence on February 2, 1953, as on that 
date Inspector Mitra's complaint was one which he 
was authorized to make by the Reserve Bank under 
s. 23(3)(b) of the Foreign •Exchange Regulation Act. It 
is thus clear to us that on a proper reading of the 
various orders made by the Additional District Magi-
strate no cognizance of the offence was taken until 
February 2, 1953. The argument that he took cogniz-
ance of the offence on September 16, 1952, is without 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
105 
foundation. 
The orders passed by the Additional 
District Magistrate on September 16, 1952, Se~tember 
19, 1952, November 19, 1952, and January 2, 1953, 
were orders passed while the investigation by the 
police into a non-cognizable offence was in progress. If 
at the end of the investigation no complaint had been 
filed against the appellant the police could have under 
the· provisions of s. 169 of the Code released him on · 
his executing a bond with or without sureties to 
appear if and when so required before the Additional 
District Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of 
the offence on a police report and to try the accused or 
commit him for trial. The Magistrate would not be 
required to, pass any further. orders in the matter. 
If, on the other hand, after completing the investig-
ation a complaint was filed, as in this case, it would be 
the duty of the Additional District Magistrate then to 
enquire whether the complaint had been filed with the 
requisite authority of the Reserve Bank as required by 
s. 23(3)(b) of the ]'oreign Exchange Regulation Act. It 
is only at this stage that the Additional District Magis-
trate would be called upon to make up his mind whether 
he would take cognizance of the offence. If the complaint 
was filed with the authority of the Reserve Bank, as 
aforesaid, there would be no legal bar to the Magistrate 
taking cognizance. On the other hand, if there was no 
proper authorization to file the complaint as required by 
s. 23 the Magistrate concerned would be prohibited 
from taking cognizance. In the present case, as the 
requisite authority had been granted by the Reserve 
Bank on January 27, 1953, to file a complaint, the 
complaint filed on February 2, was one which complied 
with the provisions of s. 23 of the ]foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act and the Additional District Magistrate 
could take cognizance of the offence which, indeed, he 
did on that date. The following observation by Das 
Gupta, J., in the case of S'uperintendent and Remem-
brancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal v. Abani Kumar 
Banerji (1) was approved by this Court in the case of 
R.R. Chari v. The State of UUar Pradesh (2) :-
(1) A.I.R. (1950) Cal. 437· 
14 
(2) (1951) S.C.R. ~12, 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
I959 
Narayandas 
Bhagwandas 
Madhavdas 
v. 
The State of_ 
West Bengal 
' 
Imam]. 
106 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
"What is ta.king cognizance has not been defined in 
the Criminal Procedure Code and. I have no desire to 
attempt to define it. It seems to me clear however 
that before it can be said that any magistrate has taken 
cognizance of any offence under section 190(l}(a) 
Criminal Procedure Code, he must not only have 
applied his mind to the contents of the petition but 
muRt have done so for the purpose of proceeding in a 
particular way as indicated in the subsequent provi-
sions of this Chapter-proceeding under section 200 
and thereafter sending it for inquiry and report under 
section 202. When the magistrate applies his mind 
not for the purpose of proceeding under the subsequent 
sections of this Chapter, but for taking action of some. 
other kind, e.g., ordering investigation under section 
156(3), or issuing a search warrant for the purpose of. 
the investigation, he cannot be said to have taken 
cognizance of the offence." 
It is, however, argued that in Chari's case this Court 
was dealing with a matter which came under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act. It seems to us, how-
ever, that that makes no difference. It is the prin-
ciple which was enunciated by Das Gupta, J., which was 
approved. As to when cognizance is taken of an 
offence will depend upon the facts and circumstances 
of each case and it is impossible to attempt to define 
what is meant by taking cognizance. Issuing of a 
search warrant for the purpose of an investigation or 
of a warrant of arrest for that purpose cannot by 
themselves be regarded as acts by which cognizance 
was taken of an offence. Obviously, it is only when a 
Magistrate applies his mind for the purpose of proceed-
ing under s. 200 ~nd subsequent sections of Chapter 
XVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure or under s. 204 
of Chapter XVII of the Code that it can be positively 
stated that he had applied his mind and therefore had 
taken cognizance. 
In our opinion, the proceedings before the Additional 
District Magistrate and the trying Magistrate were 
with jurisdiction and the trial of the appellant was 
legal. 
The appool is accordingly dismissed. 
