THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING
(MAINTENANCE
OF RECORDS)
RULES, 20051
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section
(1) read with clause (h), clause
(i), clause (j) and clause (k) of sub-section
(2) of section 73 of the Prevention
of Money-
laundering
Act,
2002 (15 of 2003)
the Central
Government
in consultation
with
the
Reserve Bank of India, hereby makes the following
rules for. maintenance
of records of
the nature and value of transactions,
the procedure and manner of maintaining
and time
for furnishing
of information
and verification
of records of the identity
of the clients of
the banking companies, financial
institutions
and intermediaries,
namely:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l)
These rules may be called the
2[Prevention of Money-laundering
(Maintenance of Records) Rules], 2005.
(2) They shall come into force on the date" of their publication in the Official
Gazette.
2. Definitions.-(l)
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a)
"Act"
means
the
Prevention
of
Money-laundering
Act,
2002
(15 of 2003);
4[(aa) "Central KYCRecords Registry" means a reporting entity, substantially
owned and controlled by the Central Government, and authorised
by that Government through a notification in the Official Gazette to
receive, store, safeguard and retrieve the KYC records in digital form
of a client as referred to in clause (ha) in such manner and to perform
such other functions as may be required under these rules;]
5[(aaa) "Aadhaar number" means an identification number as defined under
sub-section (a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;]
5[(aab) "authentication"
means the process as defined under sub-section (c)
of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;]
5[(aac) "Resident" means an individual as defined under sub-section (v) of
section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;]
1. Vide G.5.R. 444(E), dated 1st July, 2005, published
in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II,
Sec. 3(i), dated 1st July, 2005.
2. Subs. by
G.S.R. 481(E), dated
24th June, 2011, for "Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of Transactions, the Procedure and Manner
of Maintaining and Time for Furnishing Information and Verification and Maintenance of
Records of the Identity of the Clients of the Banking Companies, Financial Institutions and
Intermediaries) Rules" (w.e.f. 24-6-2011).
.
3. Came into force on 1-7-2005.
4. Ins. by G.5.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
5. Ins. by G.5.R. 538(E), dated 1st June, 2017 (w.e.f. 1-6-2017).
74
The Prevention of Money-laundering
(Maintenance of Records)
75
Rules, 2005
l[(aad)
"identity information" means the information as defined in sub-
section (n) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;]
l[(aae) "e - KYC authentication facility" means an authentication facility as
defined in Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016;]
l[(aaf)
"Yes/No authentication facility" means an authentication facility as
defined in Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016;]
2[(b) "client due diligence" means due diligence carried out on a client
referred to in clause (ha) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Act;]
3[(ba) "Designated Director" means a person designated by the reporting
entity to ensure overall compliance with the obligations imposed
under Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules and includes-
(i)
the Managing Director or a whole-time Director duly authorized
by the Board of Directors if the reporting entity is a company,
(ii) the managing partner if the reporting entry is a partnership
firm,
(iii) the
proprietor
if the
reporting
entity
is a
proprietorship
concern,
(iv) the managing trustee if the reporting entity is a trust,
(v) a person or individual, as the case may be, who controls and
manages the affairs of the reporting entity if the reporting entity
is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals, and
(vi) such other person or class of persons as may be notified by the
Government if the reporting entity does not fall in any of the
categories above.
,
Explanation.-For
the purpose of this clause, the terms "Managing
Director" and "Whole-time Director" shall have the meaning assigned to
them in the 4[Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)];]
5[(bb)
"Designated Officer"means any officeror a class of officersauthorized
by a banking company, either by name or by designation, for the
purpose of opening small accounts.]
(c) "Director" means the Director appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 49 of the Act for the purposes of 6[sections 12, 12A and 13]
of the Act;
1. Ins. by G.S.R.538(E), dated 1st June, 2017 (w.e.f. 1-6-2017).
2. Subs. by CS.R. 576(E),dated 27th August, 2013, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).Clause (b),
before substitution, stood as under:
'(b) "client" means a person that engages in a financial transaction or activity with a
banking company, or financial institution or intermediary and includes a person on whose
behalf the person that engages in the transaction or activity, is acting;'.
3. Ins. by C.S.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
4. Subs. by CS.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015, for "Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)" (w.e.f.
7-7-2015).
5. Ins. by G.S.R. 980(E),dated 16th December, 2010 (w.e.f. 16-12-2010).
6. Subs. by
CS.R.
576(E), dated
27th August,
2013, for
"sections
12 and
13" (w.e.f.
27-8-2013).
76
[Rule 2
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
l[(ca) "Know Your Client (KYC)Identifier" means the unique number or
code assigned to a client by the Central KYC Records Registry;]
l[(cb) "Know Your Client (KYC)records" means the records, including the
electronic records, relied upon by a reporting entity in carrying out
client due diligence as referred to in rule 9 of these rules;]
l[(cc) "last KYCverification or updation" means the last transaction made
by a reporting entity in the Central KYCRecords Registry by which
the KYC records of a client were recorded, changed or updated by
a reporting entity;]
2[3[(cd)] "non profit organisation" means any entity or organisation that is
registered as a trust or a society under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or any similar State legislation or a
company registered under 4[section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013)];]
(d)
"officiallyvalid document" means 5[thepassport, the driving licence,
the Voter's Identity Card issued by Election Commission of India,
job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State
Government, the letter issued by the National Population Register
containing details of name, address or any other document as notified
by the Central Government in consultation with the Regulator]:
6[Providedthat where simplified measures are applied for verifying
the identity of the clients the following documents shall be deemed
to be officiallyvalid documents:-
(a) identity card with applicant's Photograph issued by Central/State
Government
Departments,
StatutoryIRegulatory
Authorities,
Public Sector Undertakings, Scheduled Commercial Banks, and
Public Financial Institutions;
(b) letter issued by a gazetted officer,with a duly attested photograph
of the person:]
7[Provided further that where simplified measures are applied
for verifying the limited purpose of proof of address of the
1. Ins. by C.5.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
2. Ins. by C.s.R. 816(E),dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009).
3. Clause (ca) re-numbered as clause (cd) thereof by C.s.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f.
7-7-2015).
4. Subs. by C.s.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015, for "section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956)" (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
5. Subs. by C.s.R. 538(E), dated 1st June, 2017, for "the passport,
the driving licence, the
Permanent Account Number
(PAN) Card, the Voter's Identity Card issued by Election
Commission of India, job card issued by NRECA duly signed by an officer of the State
Covernment, the letter issued by the Unique Identification Authority of India or the National
Population Register containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number or any other
document as notified by the Central Government in consultation with the Regulator". (w.e.f.
1-6-2017).Earlier these words were amended by C.5.R. 980(E), dated 16th December, 2010
(w.e.f. 16-12-2010),by C.S.R. 576(E),dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013)and by C.S.R.
544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
6. Ins. by C.S.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
7. Ins. by C.S.R. 288(E),dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015).
Rule 2]
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
77
clients, where a prospective customer is unable to produce any
proof of address, the following documents shall be deemed to
be 'officially valid document':
(a) utility bill which is not more than two months old of any
service provider
(electricity, telephone, post-paid mobile
phone, piped gas, Water bill);
(b) property or Municipal tax receipt;
(c) bank
account
or
Post
Office savings
bank
account
statement;
(d) pension or family pension payment orders (PPOs) issued to
retired employees by Government Departments or Public
Sector Undertakings, if they contain the address;
(e) letter of allotment of accommodation from employer issued
by State or Central Government departments,. statutory or
regulatory bodies, public sector undertakings,
scheduled
commercialbanks, financialinstitutions and listed companies.
Similarly, leave and licence agreements with such employers
allotting official accommodation; and
1[(£)***]
2[Provided also that in case the officially valid document
presented by a foreign national does not contain the details
of address, in such case the documents issued by the
Government departments of foreign jurisdictions and letter
issued by the Foreign Embassy or Mission in India shall be
accepted as proof of address.]
3[Explanation.-For
the purpose of this clause, a document
shall be deemed to an "officially valid document" even if
there is a change in the name subsequent to its issuance
provided it: is supported by a marriage certificate issued by
the State Government or Gazette notification, indicating such
a change of name.]
(e) "prescribed value" means the value of transaction prescribed under
these rules;
(f) "Principal Officer" means an officer designated by a 4[reporting
entity];
5[(fa) Regulator means-
(i) a person or an authority or a Government which is vested with
the power to license, authorise, register, regulate or supervise the
------
1. Clause (f) omitted by G.S.R. 1318(E),dated 23rd October, 2017 (w.e.f. 23-10-2017).Clause (f),
before omission, stood as under:
"(f) documents issued by Government departments of foreign jurisdiction and letter issued by
Foreign Embassy or Mission in India.".
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1318(E),dated 23rd October, 2017 (w.e.f. 23-10-2017).
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 730(E), dated 22nd September, 2015 (w.e.f. 22-9-2015).
4. Subs. by G.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013, for "banking company, financial institution
or intermediary, as the case may be," (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
5. Subs. by G.5.R. 347(E),dated 12th April, 2017, for clause (fa) (w.e.f. 12-4-2017).Earlier clause
(fa) was inserted by G.S.R.816(E),dated 12th November, 2009(w.e.f. 12-11-2009)and amended
by G.S.R 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).Clause (fa), before substitution,
stood as under:
"(fa) "Regulator" means a person or an authority or a Government which is vested with
the power to license, authorise, register, regulate or supervise the activity of reporting
entities or the Director as may be notified by the Government for a specific reporting
entity or a class of reporting entities or for a specific purpose;".
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
[Rule 2
78
activity of reporting entities or the Director as may be notified
by the Government for a specific reporting entity or a class of
reporting entities or for a specific purpose;
(ii)
the
Reserve Bank of India
with
respect
to
Central
KYC
Records Registry as defined in clause (aa) of sub-rule (1) of
rule 2;]
1[(iii) the Directorate General of Goods and Service Tax intelligence
with respect to Gems and Jewellery Sector.]
2[(faa) "Rules" means the Prevention of Money-laundering (Maintenance of
Records) Rules, 2005;]
3[(fb) "small account" means a savings account in a banking company
where-
(i) the aggregate of all credits in a financial year does not exceed
rupees one lakh,
(ii) the aggregate of all withdrawals and transfers in a month does
not exceed rupees ten thousand, and
(iii)
the balance at any point of time does not exceed rupees fifty
thousand:]
4[Provided that this limit on balance shall not be considered while
making deposits through government grants, welfare benefits' and
payment against procurements.]
5[(g) "suspicious transaction" means a transaction referred to in clause (h),
including an attempted transaction, whether or not made in cash,
which to a person acting in good faith-
(a) gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve
proceeds of an offence specified in the Schedule to the Act,
regardless of the value involved; or
(b) appears to be made in circumstances of unusual or unjustified
complexity; or
(c) appears to have no economic rationale or bona fide purpose; or
(d)
gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve
financing of the activities relating to terrorism;]
6[Explanation.-
Transaction involving financing of the activities
relating to terrorism includes transaction involving funds suspected
to be linked or related to, or to be used for terrorism, terrorist acts
or by a terrorist, terrorist organisation or those who finance or are
attempting to finance terrorism.]
------
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1057(E),dated 23rd August, 2017 (w.e.f. 23-8-2017).
2. Ins. by G.5.R. 576(E),dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 980(E),dated 16th December, 2010 (w.e.f. 16-12-2010).
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 1038(E),dated 21st August, 2017 (w.e.f. 21-8-2017).
5. Subs. by G.5.R. 816(E),dated 12th November, 2009 for clause (g) (w.e.f. 12-11-2009).Earlier
clause (g) was amended by G.S.R.389(E),dated 24th May, 2007 (w.e.f. 24-5-2007).Clause (g),
before substitution by G.S.R. 816(E),stood as under:
"(g) "suspicious transaction" means a transaction whether or not made in cash which, to
a person acting in good faith-
(a) gives rise-to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve the proceeds
of crime; or
(b) appears to be made in circumstances of unusual or unjustified complexity; or
(c) appears to have no economic rationale or bona fide purpose; or
(d) gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve financing of
the activities relating to terrorism;".
.
6. Ins. by G.S.R.508(E),dated 16th June, 2010 (w.e.f. 16-6-2010).
Rule 3]
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
l[(h) "transaction" means a purchase, sale, loan, pledge, gift, transfer,
delivery or the arrangement thereof and includes-
(i)
opening of an account;
(ii) deposits, withdrawal,
exchange or transfer of funds
in
whatever currency, whether in cash or by cheque, payment
order or other instruments or by electronic or other non-
physical means;
(iii) the use of a safety deposit box or any other form of safe
deposit;
(iv) entering into any fiduciary relationship;
(v) any payment made or received in whole orin
part of any
contractual or other legal obligation;
(vi) any payment made in respect of playing games of chance for
cash or kind including such activities associated with casino;
and
(vii) establishing
or
creating
a
legal
person
or
legal
arrangement.]
(2) All other words and expressions used and not defined in these rules
but defined in the Act shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them
in the Act.
3. Maintenance of records of transactions (nature and value).-(l)
2[Every
reporting entity shall maintain the record of all transactions including, the record
of-
(A) all cash transactions of the value of more than ten lakh rupees or its
equivalent in foreign currency;
I
,
I
(B) all series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other
which have been individually valued below rupees ten lakh or its
equivalent in foreign currency where such series of transactions have
taken place within a month and the monthly aggregate exceeds an
amount of ten lakh rupees or its equivalent in foreign currency;]
1. Subs. by
G.5.R 576(E), dated
27th August,
2013, for
clause
(h)
(w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
Clause (h), before substitution, stood as under:
"(h) "transaction" includes deposit, withdrawal, exchange or transfer of funds in whatever
currency, whether in cash or by cheque, payment order or other instruments or by
electronic or other non-physical means.".
2. Subs. by G.5.R 576(E), dated
27th August,
2013, for Certain words
(w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
Earlier these words
were amended
by G.S.R. 76(E), dated
12th February, 2010 (w.e.f.
12-2-2010).The words, before substitution by G.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013, stood
as under:
"Every banking company or financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be, shall
maintain the record of all transactions including the record of,-
(A) all cash transactions of the value of more than rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in
foreign currency;
(B) all series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other which have been
valued below rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in foreign currency where such series
of transactions have taken place within a month;".
79
80
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
[Rule 3
l[(BA) all transactions involving receipts by non-profit organisations ofvalue
more than rupees ten lakh, or its equivalent in foreign currency;]
2[(C) all 'cash transactions where forged or counterfeit currency notes
or bank notes have been used as genuine or where any forgery of
a valuable security or a document has taken place facilitating the
transactions;]
(D) all suspicious transactions whether or not made in cash and by way
of-
(i)
deposits and credits, withdrawals into or from any accounts in
whatsoever name they are referred to in any currency maintained
by way of-
(a) cheques including third party cheques, pay orders, demand
drafts, cashiers cheques or any other instrument ofpayment of
money including electronic receipts or credits and electronic
payments or debits, or
(b) travellers cheques, or
(c) transfer from one account within the same banking company,
financial institution and intermediary, as the case may be,
including from or to Nostro and Vostro accounts, or
(d) any other mode in whatsoever name it is referred to;
(ii) credits or debits into or from any non-monetary accounts.such
as d-mat account, security account in any currency maintained
by the banking company, financial institution and intermediary,
as the case may be;
(iii) money transfer or remittances in favour of own clients or
non-clients from India or abroad and to third party beneficiaries
in India or abroad including transactions on its own account in
any currency by any of the following:-
(a) payment orders, or
(b) cashiers cheques, or
(c) demand drafts, or
(d) telegraphic or wire transfers or electronic remittances or
transfers, or
(e) internet transfers, or
(f) Automated Clearing House remittances, or
(g) lock box driven transfers or remittances, or
(h) remittances for credit or loading to electronic cards, or
1. Ins. by G.S.R.816(E),dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009).
2. Subs. by
G.S.R. 389(E), dated
24th
May,
2007, for
clause
(C)
(w.e.f. 24-5-2007).
Clause (C), before substitution, stood as under:
"(C) all cash transactions where forged or counterfeit currency notes 'or bank notes
have been used as genuine and where any forgery of a valuable security has taken
place;".
Rule 5]
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
81
(i) any other mode of money transfer by whatsoever-name it is
called;
(iv) loans
and
advances
including
credit
or
loan
substitutes,
investments and contingent liability by way of-
(a) subscription to debt instruments such as commercial paper,
certificate of
deposits,
preferential
shares,
debentures,
securitised participation, inter bank participation or any
other investments in securities or the like in whatever form
and name it is referred to, or
(b) purchase
and
negotiation
of bills, cheques
and
other
instruments, or
(c) foreign exchange contracts, currency, interest
rate
and
commodity and any other derivative instrument in whatsoever
name it is called, or
(d) letters of credit, standby letters of credit, guarantees, comfort
letters, solvency certificates and any other instrument for
settlement and/or credit support;
(v) collection services in any currency by way of collection of
bills, cheques, instruments or any other mode of collection in
whatsoever name it is referred to.
l[(E) all cross border wire transfers of the value of more than five lakh
rupees or its equivalent in foreign currency where either the origin
or destination of fund is in India;]
l[(F) all purchase and sale by any person of immovable property valued
at fifty lakh rupees or more that is registered by the reporting entity,
as the case may be.]
4.
Records
containing
information.-
The
records
referred
to
in
rule 3 2[shall contain all necessary information specified by the Regulator
to permit reconstruction of individual transaction, including] the following
information:-
(a) the nature of the transactions;
(b) the amount of the transaction and the currency in which it was
denominated;
(c) the date on which the transaction was conducted; and
(d) the parties to the transaction.
3[5. Procedure and manner of maintaining inforrnation.-(l)
Everyreporting
entity shall maintain information in respect of transactions with its client referred
to in rule 3 in accordance with the procedure and manner as may be specified
by its regulator from time to time.
1. Ins. by G.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
2. Subs. by G.5.R. 76(E), dated 12th February, 2010, for "shall contain" (w.e.f. 12-2-2010).
3. Subs. by G.S.R 576(E), dated
27th August,
2013, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013). Earlier
rule 5 was amended by G.5.R. 717(E), dated 13th December, 2005 (w.e.f. 13-12-2005),by
G.5.R. 816(E),dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009)and by G.S.R. 76(E), dated 12th
Contd. on next page
82
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
[Rule 5
(2)Every reporting entity shall evolve an internal mechanism for maintaining
such information in such form and manner and at such intervals as may be
specified by its regulator from time to time.
(3) It shall be the duty of every reporting entity, its designated director,
officersand employees to observe the procedure and the manner of maintaining
information as specified by its regulator under sub-rule (1).]
l[***]
2[7. Procedure and manner of furnishing information.-(l)
Every reporting
entity shall communicate to the Director the name, designation and address of
the Designated Director and the Principal Officer.
(2) The Principal Officer shall furnish the information referred to in clauses
(A), (B),(BA), (C), (D), (E) and (F) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 to the Director on
the basis of information available with the reporting entity. A copy of such
Contd. from previous page
February, 2010 (w.e.f. 12-2-2010).Rule 5, before substitution by G.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th
August, 2013, stood as under:
"5. Procedure and manner of maintaining
information.-(l)
Every banking company,
financial institution and intermediary, as the case may be, shall maintain information in
respect of transactions with its client referred to in rule 3 in accordance with the procedure
and manner as may be specified by its Regulator, from time to time.
(2) Every banking company, financial institution and intermediary, shall evolve an
internal mechanism for maintaining such information in such form and at such intervals
as may be specified by its Regulator, from time to time.
(3)It shall be the duty of every banking company, financial institution and intermediary,
as the case may be, to observe the procedure and the manner of maintaining information
as specified by its Regulator, under sub-rule (1).".
'
1. Rule 6 omitted by G.S.R. 576(E)~ dated
27th August,
2013' (w.e.f. 27-8-2013). Earlier
rule 6 was substituted by G.S.R. 816(E), dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009).
Rule 6, before omission by G.S.R.576(E),dated 27th August, 2013, stood as under:
"6. Retention of records of transactions.-The
records referred to in rule 3 shall be
maintained for a period of ten years from the date of transactions between the client and
the banking company, financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be.".
2. Subs. by C.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013, for rule 7 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013). Earlier
rule 7 was amended by C.S.R.717(E),dated 13th December, 2005 (w.e.f. 13-12-2005),by G.S.R
76(E),dated 12th February, 2010 (w.e.f. 12-2-2010).Rule 7, before omission by C.S.R. 576(E),
dated 27th August, 20i3, stood as under:
"7. Procedureand manner offurnishing information.-(1)
Every banking company, financial
institution and intermediary, as the case may be, shall communicate the name, designation
and address of the Principal Officer to the Director.
(2)The Principal Officershall furnish the information referred to in clauses (A), (B),(BA),
(C) and (D) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 to the Director on the basis of information available
with the banking company, financial institution and intermediary, as the case may be. A
copy of such information shall be retained by the Principal Officer for the purposes of
official record.
(3) Every banking company, financial institution and intermediary may evolve an
internal mechanism for furnishing information referred to in clauses (A), (B), (BA), (C)
and (D) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 in such form and at such intervals as may be directed
by its Regulator.
(4)It shall be the duty of every banking company, financial institution and intermediary
to observe the procedure and the manner of furnishing information as specified by its
Regulator, under sub-rule (3).".
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
82A
Rule 8]
information shall be retained by the Principal Officer for the purposes of official
record.
(3) Every reporting entity shall evolve an internal mechanism having regard
to any guidelines issued by l[the Director in consultation with, its] regulator,
for detecting the transactions referred to in clauses (A), (B), (BA), (C), (D), (E)
and (F) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 and for furnishing information about such
transactions in such form as may be directed by l[the Director in consultation
with,] its Regulator.
(4) It shall be the duty of every reporting entity, its designated director,
officers and employees to observe the procedure and the manner of furnishing
information as specified by l[the Director in consultation with,] its Regulator.]
2[8. Furnishing of information to the Director.-(1)
The Principal Officer of
a reporting entity shall furnish the information in respect of transactions referred
to in clauses (A), (B),(BA),(C) and (E) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 every month to
the Director by the 15th day of the succeeding month.
(2) The Principal Officer of a reporting entity shall furnish the information
promptly in writing or by fax or by electronic mail to the Director in respect
of transactions referred to in clause (D) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 not later than
seven working days on being satisfied that the transaction is suspicious.
(3) The Principal Officer of a reporting entity shall furnish, the information
in respect of transactions referred to in clause (F) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3, every
quarter to the Director by the 15th day of the month succeeding the quarter.
(4) For the purpose of this rule, delay of each day in not reporting a
transaction or delay of each day in rectifying a mis-reported transaction beyond
the time limit as specified in this rule shall constitute a separate violation.]
1. Ins. by G.5.R.730(E),dated 22nd September, 2015 (w.e.f. 22-9-2015).
2. Subs. by G.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).Earlier
rule 8 was amended by G.S.R. 717(E), dated
13th December, 2005 (w.e.f, 13-12-2005),
substituted by G.S.R. 389(E), dated 24th May, 2007 (w.e.f. 24-5-2007) and amended by
G.5.R. 816(E),dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009).Rule 8, before substitution by
G.5.R.576(E),dated 27th August, 2013,stood as under:
"8. Furnishing of information to the Director.-(1)
The Principal Officer of a banking
company, a financial institution and an intermediary, as the case may be, shall furnish
the information in respect of transactions referred to in Clause (A), (B) and (BA)of sub-
rule (1) of rule 3 every month to the Director by the 15th day of the succeeding month.
(2) The Principal Officer of a banking
company, a financial institution
and an
intermediary, as the case may be, shall furnish the information promptly in writing or by
fax or by electronic mail to the Director in respect of transactions referred to in clause (C)
of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 not later than seven working days from the date of occurrence of
such transaction.
(3) The Principal Officer of a banking company, a financial institution
and an
intermediary, as the case may be, shall furnish the information promptly in writing or
by fax or by electronic mail to the Director in respect of transactions referred to in clause
(D) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 not later than seven working days on being satisfied that the
transaction is suspicious:
Provided that a banking company, financial institution or intermediary, as the case may
be, and its employees shall keep the fact of furnishing information in respect of transactions
referred to in clause (D) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 strictly confidential.".
828
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
1[9. Client Due Diligence.-(l)
Every reporting entity shall-
(a) at the time of commencement of an account-based relationship-
(i) identify its clients, verify their identity, obtain information on the'
purpose and intended nature of the business relationship; and
[Rule 9
Contd. from previous page
1. Subs. by C.5.R. 576(E), dated 27th August, 2013, for rule 9 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013). Earlier
rule 9 was amended by G.S.R.389(E),dated 24th May, 2007 (w.e.f. 24-5-2007),C.5.R. 816(E),
dated 12th November 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009),G.S.R.76(E),dated 12th February, 2010 (w.e.f.
12-2-2010),C.S.R. 508(E), dated 16th June, 2010 (w.e.f. 16-6-2010)and G.S.R. 980(E), dated
16th December, 2010 (w.e.f. 16-12-2010).Rule 9, before substitution, by G.5.R. 576(E),dated
27th August, 2013, stood as under:
"9. Verification of the records of the identity of cZients.-(I)
Every banking company, financial
institution and intermediary, as the case may be, shall,-
(a) at the time of commencement of an account-based relationship, identify its clients,
verify their identity and obtain information on the purpose and intended nature of
the business relationship, and
(b) in all other cases, verify identity while carrying out-
(i)
transaction of an amount equal to or exceeding rupees fifty thousand, whether
conducted as a single transaction or several transactions that appear to be
connected, or
(ii) any international money transfer operations.
(IA) Every banking company, financial institution and intermediary, as the case may
be, shall determine whether a client is acting on behalf of a beneficial owner, identify the
beneficial owner and take all reasonable steps to verify his identity.
Explanation.-For
the purposes of this sub-rule "beneficial owner" shall mean the natural
person who ultimately owns or controls a client and or the person on whose behalf a
transaction is being conducted, and includes a person who exercise ultimate effective
control over a juridical person.
(lB) Every banking company, financial institution and intermediary, as the case may be,
shall exercise ongoing due diligence with respect to the business relationship with every
client and 'closely, examine the transactions in order to ensure that they are consistent
with their knowledge of the client, his business and risk profile and where necessary, the
source of funds.
(lC) No banking company, financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be,
shall allow the opening of or keep any anonymous account or account in fictitious names
or account on behalf of other persons whose identity has not been disclosed or cannot be
verified.
(10) When there are suspicions of money laundering or financing of the activities relating
to terrorism or where there are doubts about the adequacy or veracity of previously
obtained customer identification data, every banking company, financial institution and
<, intermediary shall review the due diligence measures including verifying again the identity
of the client and obtaining information on the purpose and intended nature of the business
relationship, as the case may be.
(2) Where the client is an individual, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (1), submit
to the banking company, financial institution and intermediary, as the case may be, one
certified copy of an 'officially valid document' containing details of his identity and
address, one recent photograph and such other documents including in respect of the
nature of business and financial status of the client as may be required by the banking
company or the financial institution or the intermediary, as the case may be:
Provided that photograph need not be submitted by a client falling under clause (b) of
sub-rule (1).
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), an individual who desires to
open a small account in a banking company may be allowed to open such an account on
Contd. on next page
Rule 9]
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
(ii) determine whether a client is acting on behalf of a beneficial
owner, and identify, the beneficial owner and take all steps to
verify the identity of the beneficial owner:
82C
Conid. from
previous
page
production of a self-attested photograph
and affixation of signature or thumb print, as
the case may be, on the form for opening the account:
Provided that-
(i) the designated officer of the banking company, while opening the small account,
certifies under his signature that the person opening the account has affixed his
signature or thumb print, as the case may be, in his presence;
(ii) a small account shall be opened only at Core Banking Solution linked banking
company branches or in abranch where it is possible to manually monitor and ensure
that foreign remittances are not credited to a small account and that the stipulated
limits on monthly and annual aggregate of transactions and balance in such accounts
are not breached, before a transaction is allowed to take place;
(iii) a small account shall remain operational initially for a period of twelve months, and
thereafter for a further period of twelve months if the holder of such an account
provides evidence before the banking company of having applied for any of the
officially valid documents within twelve months of the opening of the said account,
with the entire relaxation provisions to be reviewed in respect of the said account
after twenty-four months;
(iv) a small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of money laundering
or financing of terrorism or other high risk scenarios, the identity of client shall be
established through the production of officially valid documents, as referred to in
sub-rule (2) of rule 9; and
(v) foreign remittance shall not be allowed to be credited into a small account unless
the identity of the client is fully established through the production of officially valid
documents, as referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 9,
(3) Where the client is a company, it shall for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit to the
banking company or financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be, one certified
copy of the following documents-c-
(i) Certificate of incorporation;
(ii) Memorandum and Articles of Association;
(iii) a resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney granted, to its
managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf; and
(iv) an officially valid document in respect of managers, officers or employees holding
an attorney to transact on its behalf,
(4)Where the client is a partnership firm, it shall for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit
to the banking company, or the financial institution, or the intermediary one certified copy
of the following documents:-
(i) registration certificate;
(ii) partnership deed; and
(iii)
an officially valid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to transact
on its behalf,
(5) Where the client is a trust, it shall, "for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit to the
banking company," or the financial institution, or the intermediary one certified copy of
the following documents:-
(i) registration certificate;
(ii) trust deed; and
(iii) an officially valid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to transact
on its behalf,
Conid.
on next page
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
Provided that where the Regulator is of the view that money
laundering and terrorist financing risks are effectively managed
and where this is essential not to interrupt the normal conduct of
business, the Regulator may permit the reporting entity to complete
the verification as soon as reasonably practicable following the
establishment of the relationship; and
(b)
in all other cases, verify identity while carrying out-
(i) transaction of an amount equal to or exceeding rupees fifty
thousand, whether conducted as a single transaction or several
transactions that appear to be connected, or
(ii) any international money transfer operations.
l[(lA) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (I), every reporting entity shall
within three days after the commencement of an account-based relationship with
a client, file the electronic copy of the client's KYC records with the Central
, KYCRecords Registry;]
.
l[(lB) The Central KYC Records Registry shall process the KYC records
received from a reporting entity for de-duplicating and issue a KYCIdentifier for
each client to the reporting entity, which shall communicate the KYCIdentifier
in writing to their client;]
1[(1C)Where a client, for the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b), submits
a KYCIdentifier to a reporting entity, then such reporting entity shall retrieve
the KYC records online from the Central KYC Records Registry by using the
KYC Identifier and shall not require a clien:tto submit the same KYC records
or information or any other additional identification documents or details,
unless-
820
[Rule 9
Contd. from previous
page
(6) Where the client is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals, it shall
submit to the banking company, or the financial institution or the intermediary one
certified copy of the following documents:-
(i)
resolution of the managing body of such association or body of individuals;
(ii) power of attorney granted to him to transact on its behalf;
(iii) an officiallyvalid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to transact
on its behalf; and
(iv) such information as may be required by the banking company or the financial
institution or the intermediary to collectively establish the legal existence of such an
association or body of individuals.
(6A) Where the client is a juridical person, the banking company, financial institution
and intermediary, as the case may be, shall verify that any person purporting to act on
behalf of such client is so authorised and verify the identity of that person.
(7) (i) The regulator shall issue guidelines incorporating the requirements of sub-rules
(1) to (6A) above and may prescribe enhanced measures to verify the client's identity
taking into consideration type of client, business relationship or nature and value of
transactions.
(ii) Every banking company, financial institution and intermediary as the case may be,
shall formulate and implement a Client Identification Programme to determine the true
identity of its clients, incorporating requirements of sub-rules (1) to (6A) and guidelines
issued under clause (i) above.",
1. Ins. by C.S.R. 544(E),dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
(i) there is a change in the information of the client as existing in the
records of Central KYC Records Registry;
(ii) the current address of the client is required to be verified;
(iii)
the reporting entity considers it necessary in order to verify the
identity or address of the client, or to perform enhanced due diligence
or to build an appropriate risk profile of the client.]
l[(lD) A reporting entity after obtaining additional or updated information
from a client under sub-rule (1C),shall as soon as possible furnish the updated
information to the Central KYCRecords Registry which shall update the existing
KYCrecords of the client and the Central KYCRecords Registry shall thereafter
inform electronically all reporting entities who have dealt with the concerned
client regarding updatation of KYC record of the said client.]
l[(lE) The reporting entity which performed the last KYCverification or sent
updated information in respect of a client shall be responsible for verifying the
authenticity of the identity or address of the client.]
l[(lF) A reporting entity shall not use the KYCrecords of a client obtained
from the Central KYC Records Registry for purposes other than verifying the
identity or address of the client and shall not transfer KYC records or any
information contained therein to any third party unless authorisedto
do so by
the client or by the Regulator or by the Director;]
1[(1G) The regulator shall issue guidelines to ensure that the Central KYC
records are accessible to the reporting entities in real time.]
(2) For the purpose of clause (a) of sub-rule (1), a reporting entity may rely
on a third party subject to the conditions that-.
2[(a) the reporting entity, within two days, obtains from the third party or
from the Central KYC Records Registry records or the information
of the client due diligence carried out by the third party.]
(b) the reporting entity takes adequate steps to satisfy itself that copies
of identification data and other relevant documentation relating to
the client due diligence requirements will be made available from
the third party upon request without delay;
(c) the reporting entity is satisfied that such third party is regulated,
supervised or monitored for, and has measures in place for compliance
with client due diligence and record-keeping requirements in line
with the requirements and obligations under the Act;
(d) the third party is not based in a country or jurisdiction assessed as
high risk;
Rule 9]
82E
1. Ins. by C.5.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
2. Subs. by C.S.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 7-7-2015). Clause (a), before
substitution,
stood as under:
"(a)
the reporting entity immediately
obtains necessary information
of such client due diligence
carried out by the third party;".
•
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
(e) the reporting entity is ultimately responsible for client due diligence
and undertaking enhanced due diligence measures, as applicable;
and
(f)
where a reporting entity relies on a third party that is part of the
same financial group, the Regulator may issue guidelines to consider
any relaxation in the conditions (a) to (d).
(3)The beneficial owner for the purpose of sub-rule (1) shall be determined
as under-
(a) where the client is a company, the beneficial owner is the nahlral
person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or
more juridical person, has a controlling ownership interest or who
exercises control through other means.
Explanation.-For
the purpose of this sub-clause-
1. "Controlling
ownership
interest"
means
ownership
of
or
entitlement to more than twenty-five per cent. of shares or capital
or profits of the company;
2.
"Control" shall include the right to appoint majority of the
directors or to control the management or
policy
decisions
including
by
virtue
of their
shareholding
or management
rights or shareholders agreements or voting agreements;
(b) where the client is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the
natural personfs) who, whether acting alone or together, or through
one or more juridical person, has ownership ofIentitlement to more
than fifteen per cent. of capital or profits of the partnership;
(c) where the client is an unincorporated
association or body
of
individuals, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who,
whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical
person, has ownership of or entitlement to more than fifteenper cent.
of the property or capital or profits of such association or body of
individuals;
(d) where no natural person is identified under (a) or (b) or (c) above,
the beneficial owner is the relevant natural person who holds the
position of senior managing official;
(e) where the client is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s)
shall include 'identification of the author of the trust, the trustee, the
beneficiaries with fifteen per cent. or more interest in the trust and
any other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over
the trust through a chain of control or ownership; and
(f) where the client or the owner of the controlling interest isa company
listed on a stock exchange, or is a subsidiary of such a company, it is
not necessary to identify and verify the identity of any shareholder
or beneficial owner of such companies.
82F
[Rule 9
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
82G
Rules, 2005
1[(4) Where the client is an individual, who is eligible to be enrolled for an
Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (1)submit to the reporting
entity,-
.
(a) the Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification Authority
of India; and
(b) the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined ill
Income-tax Rules, 1962;
and such other documents including in respect of the nature of business and
financial status of the client as may be required by the reporting entity:
Provided that where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to a client,
the client shall furnish proof of application of enrolment for Aadhaar and in
case the Permanent Account Number is not submitted, one certified copy of an
'officially valid document' shall be submitted,
1. Subs. by G.5.R.538(E),dated 1st June, 2017, for sub-rule 4 to sub-rule (9) (w.e.f. 1-6-2017).
Sub-rule (4) to sub-rule (9),before substitution, stood as under:
"(4) Where the client is an individual, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (I), submit to
the reporting entity, one certified copy of an 'officially valid document' containing details
of his identity and address, one recent photograph and such other documents including in
respect of the nature of business and financial status of the client as may be required by the
reporting entity:
Provided that photograph need not be submitted by a client falling under clause (b) of
sub-rule (1).
(5)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (4),an individual who desires to open
a small account in a banking company may be allowed to open such an account on production
of a self-attested photograph and affixation of Signature or thumb print, as the case may be,
on the form for opening the account:
Provided that-
(i) the designated officer of the banking company, while opening the small account,
certifies under his signature that the person opening the account has affixed his
signature or thump print, as the case may be, in his presence;
(ii) a small account shall be opened only at Core Banking Solution linked banking
company branches or in a branch where it is possible to manually monitor and ensure
that foreign remittances are not credited to a small account and that the stipulated
limits on monthly and annual aggregate of transactions and balance in such accounts
are not breached, before a transaction is allowed -totake place;
(iii) a small account shall remain operational initially for a period of twelve months, and
thereafter for a further period of twelve months if the holder of such an account
provides evidence before the banking company of having applied for any of the
officially valid documents within twelve months of the opening of the said account,
with the entire relaxation provisions to be reviewed in respect of the said account
after twenty-four months;
(iv) a small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of money laundering
or financing of terrorism or other high risk scenarios, the identity of client shall be
established through the production of officially valid documents, as referred to in
sub-rule (4) of rule 9; and
(v) foreign remittance shall not be allowed to be credited into a small account unless
the identity of the client is fully established through the production of officiallyvalid
documents, as referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 9.
(6) Where the client is a company, it shall for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit to the
reporting entity one certified copy of the following documents:-
Contd.
all next page
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
Provided further that photograph need not be submitted by a client fallin
under clause (b) of sub-rule (1).
l[Explanation.-Obtaining
a certified copy by reporting entity shall mea
comparing the copy of officiallyvalid document so produced by the client wit
the original and recording the same on the copy by the authorised officer of th
reporting entity in a manner prescribed by the regulator.]
(4A) Where the client is an individual, who is not eligible to be enrolle
for an Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (1), submit to th
reporting entity, the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined i
the Income-tax Rules, 1962:
Provided .that if the client does not submit the Permanent Account Numbe
he shall submit one certified copy of an 'officially valid document' containin
details of his identity and address, one recent photograph
and such othe
documents including in respect of the nature or business and financial statu
of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.
(5) Notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-rules (4) and (4A), a
individual who desires to open a small account in a banking company may b
allowed to open such an account on production of a self-attested photograp
and affixation of signature or thumb print, as the case may be, on the form fc
opening the account:
Provided that-
(i) the designated officer of the banking company, while opening th
small account, certifies under this signature that the person openin
the account has affixed his signature or thump print, as the case ma
be, in his presence:
82H
[Rule
Contd. from previous page
(i) Certificate of incorporation;
(ii) Memorandum and Articles of Association;
(iii) A resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney granted to i
managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf; and
(iv) art officiallyvalid document in respect of
managers, officers or employees holdir
an attorney to transact on its behalf.
(7) Where
the client is
a partnership
firm, it
shall
for the
purposes
of sul
rule (1) submit to the reporting entity one certified copy of the following documents:-
(i) registration certificate;
(ii) partnership deed; and
(iii) an officiallyvalid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to transa
on its behalf.
(8) Where the client is a trust, it shall, for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit to tl
reporting entity one certified copy of the following documents:-
(i)
registration certificate;
(ii)
trust deed; and
(iii) an officiallyvalid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to transa.
~
on its behalf.
(9) Where the client is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals, it sha
submit to the reporting entity one certified copy of the following documents:-
(i) resolution of the managing body of such association or body of individuals;
(ii)
power of attorney granted to him to transact on its behalf;
(iii) an officially valid document in respect of the person, holding an attorney to transact c
its behalf; and
(iv) such information as may be required by the reporting entity to collectively establish tl
legal existence of such an association or body of individuals.".
l. Ins. by G.s.R. 1300(E),dated 16th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 16-10-2017).
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
(ii) the small account shall be opened only at Core Banking Solution
linked banking company branches or in a branch where it is possible
to manually monitor and ensure that foreign remittances are not
credited to a small account and that the stipulated limits on monthly
and annual aggregate of transactions and balance in such accounts
are not breached,.before a transaction is allowed to take place;
(iii)
the small account shall remain operational initially for a period of
twelve months, and thereafter for a further period of twelve months
if the holder of such an account provides evidence before the banking
company of having applied for any of the officiallyvalid documents
within twelve months of the opening of the said account, with the
entire relaxation provisions to be reviewed in respect of the said
account after twenty-four months.
(iv) the small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion
of money laundering or financing of terrorism or
other high risk
scenarios, the identity of client shall be established through the
production of officiallyvalid documents, as referred to in sub-rule (4)
and the Aadhaar number of the client or where an Aadhaar number
has not been assigned to the client, through the production of proof
of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar along with an officially
valid document;
Provided further that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled
for an Aadhaar number, the identity of client shall be established
through the production of an officiallyvalid document;
(v) the foreign remittance shall not be allowed to be credited into the
small account unless the identity of the client is fully established
through the production of officiallyvalid documents, as referred to
in sub-rule (4) and the Aadhaar number of the client or where an
Aadhaar number has not been assigned to the client, through the
production of proof of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar
along with an.officiallyvalid document:
Provided that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled for the Aadhaar
number, the identity of client shall be established through the production of an
officiallyvalid document.
(6) Where the
client is
a
company,
it
shall
for the
purposes
of
sub-rule (I), submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the following
documents:-
(i) Certificate of incorporation;
(ii) Memorandum and Articles of Association;
(iii)
A resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney
granted to its managers, officers or employees to transact on its
behalf:
(iv) (a) Aadhaar number; and
(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60as defined in the Income-
tax Rules, 1962.
issued to managers, officersor employees holding an attorney to transact on the
company's behalf or where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof
of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account
Number is not submitted an officiallyvalid document shall be submitted:
Rule 9]
82-1
82J
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
[Rule 9
Provided
that
for the purpose
of this clause
if the managers,
officers or
employees holding an attorney to transact on the company's
behalf are not eligible
to be enrolled
for Aadhaar
number
and do not submit
the Permanent
Account
Number,
certified copy of an officially valid document
shall be submitted.
(7) Where the client is a partnership
firm, it shall, for the purposes
of sub-
rule
(I), submit
to the reporting
entity
the certified
copies
of the following
documents:-
.
(i)
registration
certificate;
(ii)
partnership
deed; and
(iii) (a)
Aadhaar
number;
and
(b)
Permanent
Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income-
tax Rules, 1962,
issued to the person
holding
an attorney
to transact
on its behalf or where
an
Aadhaar
number
has not been assigned, proof of application
towards
enrolment
for Aadhaar
and in case Permanent
Account
Number
is not submitted
an of-
ficially valid document
shall be submitted:
Provided
that for the purpose
of this clause, if the person holding an attorney
to transact
on the company's
behalf is not eligible to be enrolled
for Aadhaar
number
and does not submit the Permanent
Account Number,
certified copy of
ar, officially valid document
shall be submitted.
.
(8) Where the client is a trust, it shall, for the purposes
of sub-nile
(1) submit
to the reporting
entity the certified copies of the following
documents:-
(i)
registration
certificate:
(ii)
trust deed; and
(iii) (a)
Aadhaar
number;
and
(b). Permanent
Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income-
tax Rules, 1962,
issued to the 'person holding
an attorney
to transact on its behalf or where Aad-
haar number
has not been assigned, 'proof of application
towards
enrolment
for
Aadhaar
and in case Permanent
Account Number
is not submitted
an officially
valid document
shall be submitted:
Provided
that for the purpose
of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact
on the company's
behalf is not eligible to be enrolled
for Aadhaar
number
and does not submit the Permanent
Account Number,
certified copy of
an officially valid document
shall be submitted.
(9) Where the client is an unincorporated
association or a body of individuals,
it shall
submit
to the reporting
entity
the certified
copies
of the following
documents:-
(i)
resolution
of the managing
body
of such
association
or body
of
individuals;
(ii)
power
of attorney
granted
to him to transact
on its behalf;
(iii) (a)
the Aadhaar
number;
and
(b)
Permanent
Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income-
tax Rules, 1962,
issued to the person holding, an attorney to transact on its behalf or where
Aadhaar
number
has not been
assigned
proof
of application
towards
enrolment
for Aadhaar
and in case the Permanent
Account
Number
is
not submitted
an officially valid document
shall be submitted;
and
Rule 9]
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
82K
I
(iv) such information as may be required by the reporting entity to
collectivelyestablish the legal existence of such an association or
body of individuals;
Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact on the company's behalf is not eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar
number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified copy of
an officiallyvalid document shall be submitted.]
(10) Where the client is a juridical person, the reporting entity shall verify
that any person purporting to act on behalf of such client is so authorized and
verify the identity of that person.
(11)No reporting entity shall allow the opening of or keep any anonymous
account or account in fictitious names or account on behalf of other persons
whose identity has not been disclosed or cannot be verified.
(12) (i) Every reporting entity shall exer:ise ongoing due diligence with
respect to the business relationship with every client and closely examine the
transactions in order to ensure that they are consistent with their knowledge
of the client, his business and risk profile and where necessary, the source of
funds.
(ii) When there are suspicions of money laundering or financing of the
activities relating to terrorism or where there are doubts about the adequacy
or veracity of previously obtained client identification data, the reporting entity
shall review the due diligence measures including verifying again the identity
of the client and obtaining information on the purpose and intended nature of
the business relationship, as the case may be.
(iii) The reporting entity shall apply client due diligence measures also to
existing clients on the basis of materiality and risk, and conduct due diligence
OT'. such existing relationships at appropriate times or as may be specified by the
regulator, taking into account whether and when client due diligence measures
have previously been undertaken and the adequacy of data obtained.
(13) (i) Every reporting entity shall carry out risk assessment to identify,
assess' and take effective measures to mitigate its money laundering
and
terrorist financing risk for clients, countries or geographic areas, and products,
services, transactions or delivery channels that is consistent with any national
risk assessment conducted by a body or authority duly notified by the Central
Government.
(ii) The risk assessment mentioned in clause (i) shall-
(a) be documented;
(b) consider all the relevant risk factors before determining the level of
overall risk and the appropriate level and type of mitigation to be
applied;
(c) be kept up to date; and
(d) be available to competent authorities and self-regulating bodies.
(14)(i)The regulator shall issue guidelines incorporating the requirements of
sub-rules (1) to (13) above and may prescribe enhanced or simplified measures
to verify the client's identity taking into consideration the type of client, business
relationship, nature and value of transactions based on the overall money
laundering and terrorist financing risks involved.
Explanation.-For
the purpose of this clause, simplified measures are not
acceptable whenever there is a suspicion of money laundering or terrorist
financing, or where specific higher-risk scenarios apply or where the risk
identified is not consistent with the national risk assessment.
(ii) Every reporting entity shall formulate and implement a Client Due
Diligence Programme, incorporating the requirements of sub-rules (1) to (13)
and guidelines issued under clause (i) above.
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules. 2005
(iii) the Client Due Diligence Programme shall include policies, controls and
procedures, approved by tile senior management, to enable the reporting entity
to manage and mitigate the risk that have been identified either by the reporting
enti\r or through national risk assessment.
[(15)Any reporting entity,
at the time of receipt of the Aadhaar number
under provisions of this rule, shall carry out authentication using either e-KYC
authentication facility or Yes/No authentication facility provided by Unique
Identification Authority of India.]
"
1[(16) In case the client referred to in sub-rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 is not
a resident or is a resident in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Assam or
Meghalaya and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, the client shall
submit to the reporting entity one certified copy of officially valid document
containing details of his identity and address; one recent photograph and such
other document including in respect of the nature of business and financial status
of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.]
1[(17) (a) In case the client, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain
a Permanent Account Number, referred to in sub-rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 does
not submit the Aadhaar number or the Permanent Account Number at the time
of commencement of an account based relationship with a reporting entity, the
client shall submit the same within a period of six months from the date of the
commencement of the account based relationship:
Provided that the clients, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain the
Permanent Account Number, already having an account based relationship with
reporting entities prior to date of this notification, the client shall 2[submit the
Aadhaar number and Permanenet Account Number or Form No. 60, by such
date* as may be notified by the Central Government].
(b) As per regulation 12 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations,
2016,
the local authorities
in
the
State Governments
or Union-territory
Administrations have become or are in the process of becoming UIDAI Registrars
for Aadhaar enrolment and are organising special Aadhaar enrolment camps
at convenient locations for providing enrolment facilities in consultation with
UIDAI and any individual desirous of commencing an account based relationship
as provided in this rule, who does not possess the Aadhaar number or has not
yet enrolled for Aadhaar, may also visit such special Aadhaar enrolment camps
for Aadhaar enrolment or any of the Aadhaar enrolment centres in the vicinity
with existing registrars of UIDAL
(c) In case the client fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent
Account Number within the aforesaid six months period, the said account shall
cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account
Number is submitted by the client:
3[Providedthat in case the client already having an account based relationship
with reporting entities prior to the date of publication of this notification in the
82L
[Rule 9
1: Ins. by G.5.R. 538(E),dated 1st June, 2017 (w.e.f. 1-6-2017).
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 1506(E),dated 12th December, 2017, for "submit the Aadhaar number and
Permanent Account Number by 31st December, 2017" (w.e.f. 12-12-2017).
• The Central Government hereby notifies the 31st March, 2018 or six months from the date
of commencement of account based relationship by the client, whichever is later, as the date
of submission of the Aadhaar Number, and Permanent Account Number or Form 60 by the
clients to the reporting entity. [Vide G.S.R. 1509(E),dated 13th December, 2017.]
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 1506(E),dated 12th December, 2017, for proviso (w.e.f. 12-12-2017).Proviso,
before substitution, stood as under:
"Provided that in case client already having an account based relationship with reporting
entities prior to date of this notification fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent
Account Number by 31st December, 2017, the said account shall cease to be operational
till the time the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number is submitted by the
client.".
•
RUie 9Al
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
at Records)
Rules, 2005
82M
official Gazette fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account
Number by such date as may be notified by the Central Government, the said
account shall cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar Number and
Permanent Account Number is submitted by the client.]]
.
1{(18)In case the identity information relating to the Aadhaar number or
Permanent Account Number submitted by the client referred to in sub-rule (4) to
(9) of rule 9 does not have current address of the client, the client shall submit
an officially valid document to the reporting entity:]
2[Provided that in case of officially valid document furnished by the client
does not contain updated address, the following documents shall be deemed to
be officially valid documents for the limited purpose of proof of address:-
(a) utility bill which is not more than two months old of any service provider
(electricity, telephone, post-paid mobile phone, piped gas, water bill);
(b) property or Municipal tax receipt;
(c) pension or family pension payment orders (PPOs) issued to retired
employees by Government Departments or Public Sector Undertakings,
if they contam the address;
(d) letter of allotment of accommodation from employer issued by State
Government or Central Government Departments, statutory or regulatory
bodies, public sector undertakings, scheduled commercial banks, financial
institutions and listed companies and leave and licence agreements with
such employers allotting official accommodation;
Provided
further
that the client shall submit updated
officially valid
document with current address within a period of three months of submitting
the above documents.]
3[9A.Functions and obligations of the Central KYCRecords Registry.-(l)
The Central Government shall within a period of 4[one hundred and eighty
days] from the date of coming into force at the Prevention of Money-laundering
(Maintenance of Records) Amendment Rules, 2015 set-up a Central KYCRecords
Registry having its own seal for the purpose of receiving, storing, safeguarding
and retrieving electronic copies of KYC records obtained by the reporting entities
from their clients in accordance with these rules.
(2) The 'Central KYC Registry shall perform the following functions and
obligations, namely:-
(a) shall follow any operating instructions issued by the Regulator, consistent
with the guidelines referred to in clause (g) and issue the same to
implement the requirements of these rules;
(b) shall be responsible for storing, safeguarding and retrieving the KYC
records and making such records available online to reporting entities or
Director;
(c) shall take all precautions necessary to ensure that the electronic copies of
KYCrecords are not lost, destroyed or tampered with and that sufficient
back up of electronic records are available at all times at an alternative
safe and secure place;
(d) shall cause an annual audit of its controls, systems, procedures and
safeguards and shall undertake
corrective actions for deficiencies, if
any;
(e) shall provide
information
only to the reporting
entities which are
registered with it on payment of fees as specified by the Regulator;
1. Ins. by G.5.R. 538(E), dated 1st June, 2017 (w.e.f. 1-6-2017).
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1300(E),dated 16th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 16-10-2017)
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).
4. Subs. by G.5.R. 882(E), dated 18th November, 2015, for "ninety days" (w.e.f. 18-11-2015).
Earlier the words "ninety days" were substituted by G.5.R. 693(E), dated 11th September,
2015 (w.e.f. 11-9-2015).
82N
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules. 2005
[Rule 9A
(f) shall appoint a comrliance officerwho shall be responsible for monitoring
the compliance
0
the Act, the rules made
and
the notifications
issued thereunder and also the guidelines and instructions issued bX
the Central Government and the Regulator and for redressal of Clients
grievances; the compliance officer shall immediately and independently
report to the Central Government any non-compliance observed by
him;
(g) the Regulator in consultation with the Central Govermnent and the
Central KYC Records Registry may issue guidelines to be followed by
the reporting entities for filing the KYC records with the Central KYC
Records Registry or any other matter in connection with or incidental
thereto;
(h) the Central Government, in consultation with
Regulator, may by
notification in the public interest and in the interest of the regulated
entities, direct that any of the provisions of rule 9 or rule 9A-
(i)
shall not apply to a class or Classesof regulated entities; or
(ii) shall apply to the class or Classesof regulated entities with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the
notification.]
1[9B.Inspection by Reserve Bank of India.-(l)
The Reserve Bank may,
with respect to functions of the Central Registry referred to in rule 9A,call for
any information, statement or other particulars from the Central Registry or
cause an inspection of the Central Registry to be made by one or more of its
officers as the Reserve Bank may deem fit.
(2) The Reserve Bank shall supply to the Central Registry, a copy of the
report of such inspection.
(3)It shall be the duty of every director or officeror employee of the Central
Registry to produce before the officer making an inspection under sub-section
(1) all such books, accounts and other documents in his custody and to furnish
him with any statement and information relating to the affairs of the Central
Registry, as the said officer may require of him.
(4) The expenses of the inspection under sub-rule (1) shall be borne by the
Central Registry.]'
I
2[10. Maintenance of the records of the identity of clients.-3[(1)
Every
reporting entity shall maintain the physical copy of records of the identity of
1. Ins. by G.5.R. 347(E),dated 12th April, 2017 (w.e.f. 12-4-2017).
2. Subs. by G.S.R.576(E),dated 27th August, 2013, for rule 10 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).Earlier rule 10
was amended G.5.R. 717(E),dated 13th December, 2005 (w.e.f. 13-12-2005),by G.5.R. 816(E),
dated 12th November, 2009 (w.e.f. 12-11-2009)and by G.S.R. 508(E), dated 16th June, 2010
(w.e.f. 16-6-2010).Rule 10;before substitution by G.5.R.576(E),dated 27th August, 2013,stood
as under:
"It). Maintenance of the records of the identity of clients.-(l)
Every banking company or
financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be, shall maintain the records of the
identity of its clients.
.
(2) The records of the identity of clients shall be maintained in hard and soft copies in
a manner as may be specified by its Regulator, from time to time.
(3) The records of the identity of clients shall be maintained for a period of ten years
from the date of cessation of the transactions between the client and the banking company
or financial institution or intermediary, as the case may be.
Explanation.-For
the purposes of this rule,-
(i) the expression 'records of the identity of clients' shall include records of the
identification data, account files and business correspondence.
(ii) the expression 'cessation of the transactions' means termination of an account or
business relationship.",
3. Subs. by G.5.R. 544(E),dated 7th July, 2015, sub-rule (1) (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).Sub-rule (1), before
substitution, stood as under:
"(I) Every reporting entity shall maintain the records of the identity of its clients
obtained in accordance with rule 9.".
Rule 11)
The Prevention
of Money-laundering
(Maintenance
of Records)
Rules, 2005
83
its clients obtained in accordance with rule 9, after filing the electronic copy of
such records with the Central KYC Records Registry.]
1[(2)The records of the identity of clients shall be maintained by a reporting
entity in the manner as may be specified by the Regulator from time to time.]
•(3) Where the reporting entity does not have records of the identity of its
existing clients, it shall obtain the records within the period specified by the
regulator, failing which the reporting entity shall close the account of the clients
after giving due notice to the client.
Explanation.-For
the purpose of this rule, the expression "records of the
identity of clients" shall include updated records of the identification date,
account files and business correspondence.]
2[lOA. Furnishing of Report to Director.-(l)
The persons referred to in
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Act shall furnish reports on the
measures taken to the Director every month by the 10th day of the succeeding
month.
(2) The Director may relax the time interval in sub-rule (1) above to
every three months on specific request made by the reporting entity based on
reasonable cause.]
2[lOB.
Expenses
for
audit.-(l)
The expenses
of, and
incidental
to,
audit referred to in sub-section (lA) of section 13 of the Act (including the
remuneration of the accountant, qualified assistants, semi-qualified and other
assistants who may be engaged by such accountant) shall be paid in accordance
with the amount specified in sub-rule (2) of rule 14Bof the Income-tax Rules,
1962for every hour of the period as specified by the Director.
(2) The period referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be specified in terms of the .
number of hours required for completing \he report.
(3) The accountant referred to in sub-section (lA) of section 13 of the Act
shall maintain a time sheet and submit it to the Director, along with the bill.
(4) The Director shall ensure that the number of hours claimed for billing
purposes is
commensurate with the size and quality of the report submitted
by the accountant.]
11. Interpretation.-If
any question arises relating to the interpretation of
these rules, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government and the
decision of the Central Government shall be final.
1. Subs. by G.5.R. 544(E), dated 7th July, 2015, for sub-rule (2) (w.e.f. 7-7-2015).Sub-rule (2),
before substitution, stood as under:
"(2) The records of the identity of clients shall be maintained in a manner as may be
specified by its regulators from time to time.".
2. Ins. by G.5.R. 576(E),dated 27th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-8-2013).
