Moy 8, 
126 
SUPREME COUR.T REPORTS [1960(1)] 
JNANENDRA NATH GHOSE 
v. 
THE STATE OF \VEST BENGAL 
(SYED JAFER IMAM AND J. L. KAPUR, JJ.) 
j u.ry Trial-M isdirecti01i-A pprover-Reliability--C orrobora-
tjon-1 ndian Evidence Act, I872 (I of I872) s. I33· 
The appellant was tried on a charge of murder by the 
Sessions Judge with the aid of a jury. The evidence against him 
consisted of the testimony of an approver and the proof of 
corroborative circumstances tending to connect him with the 
crime. The jury found the appellant guilty and the Sessions 
Judge accepting the verdict sentenced him to imprisonment for 
life. An appeal to the High Court was dismissed as that Court 
found no misdirections in the charge to the jury. The appellant 
contended that there was misdirection in the charge to the jury 
in that the jury was not told, as laid down in Sarwan Singh v. 
The State of Punjab, [1957] S.C.R. 953, that the approver's 
evidence had to satisfy a double test i.e., he must be a reliable 
witness and his evidence must receive sufficient corroboration and 
in that the corroborating evidence was not sufficient to connect 
the appellant with the crime. 
Held, that there were no misdirections in the charge. The 
observations in Sarwan Singh's case that it must be shown that 
the approver was a reliable witness were made in the special 
circumstances of that case where the approver had definitely been 
found to be so thoroughly discrepant as to be wholly unreliable. 
In the present case there was nothing to show that the evidence 
of the approver was in any way unreliable. 
Sarwatt Singh v. The State of Pmijab, [1957] S.C.R. 953, dis-
tinguished. 
The Sessions Judge had correctly directed the jury that the 
corroboration of the evidence of the approver in material parti-
culars must relate not only to the commission of the crime, but 
also to the evidence connecting or tending to connect the accused 
with the crin1e. The circumstances proved in the case corroborated 
the approver's evidence connecting the appellant with the crime. 
Once there was evidence of such circumstances it was for the jury 
to decide whether they were sufficient corroboration of the 
approver's evidence that the appellant murdered the deceased. 
CRIMINAL 
APPELLATE 
JURISDICTION: 
Criminal 
Appeal No. 101 of 1958. 
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and 
Order dated the 12th September, 1956 of the Calcutta. 
High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1956, a.rising 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
127 
out of the judgment and order dated the 8th Decem-
ber, 1955 of the Sessions Judge, Birbhum in Sessions 
Trial No. l of November 1955. 
H.J. Umrigar and D. N. Mukherjee,. for the appel-
lant. 
K. B. Bagchi, P. K. Ghosh for P. K. Bose, for the 
respondent. 
1959. May 8. The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by 
IMAM J.-The appellant was sentenced to imprison-
ment for life under s. 302 by the Sessions Judge of 
Birbhum who agreed with the majority verdict of the 
jury that he was guilty. He appealed against his con-
viction to the Calcutta High Court. That Court being 
of the opinion that there was no misdirection in the 
Sessions Judge's charge to the jury dismissed the 
appeal. 
Two persons Jagdish Gorain and Sudhir 
Gorain were also tried along with the appellant but. 
were acquitted by the jury whose verdict the Sessions 
Judge accepted. The appellant appealed to the High 
Court for a certificate to appeal to this Court which 
was refused. The present appeal is by special leave. 
According to the prosecution Sibapada Hati was 
married to a girl by the name of Lila. About a month 
previous to the date of occurrence the appellant had 
made a proposal' to her that she should live with him 
which was rejected. The appellant •thought that the 
removal of Sibapada Hati would clear the way and 
improve his chance of gaining Lila's favour. Accord-
ingly he murdered Sibapada Hati on the May 26, 1955. 
In that murder he was assisted by Jagdish Gorain, 
Sudhir Gorain and the approver Sastipada Ghose. 
The conviction of the appellant depended on the 
evidence of the approver and the circumstantial 
evidence which corroborated him in connecting or 
tending or connect the appellant with the murder of 
the deceased Sibapada Hati. Unless there was a mis-
direction or non-direction amounting to a misdirection 
in the charge to the jury which, in fact, had occasioned 
a failure of justice the jury's verdict must prevail and 
:r959 
J nanendra N atJ. 
Ghose 
v. 
The Stale of 
West Bengal 
Imam/. 
z959 
J nanendra Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
ltna111 j. 
128 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
it cannot be interfered with. The High Court was of 
the opinion that there was no misdirection in the 
Sessions Judge's charge to the jury and we are in 
agreement with the High Court. 
We have examined the charge to the jury. The 
Sessions Judge in dealing with the evidence of the 
approver charged the jury as follows :-
" Before doing so, some established legal principles 
as regards the approver's evidence and the confes-
sions on which the prosecution has relied in the 
present case are required to be explained to you. 
The approver is a competent witness against an 
accused person and although his evidence is strictly 
admissible and a conviction is not illegal, merely 
because it is based. on approver's evidence, it is a 
settled rule of practice not to convict a person on 
such evidence except under very rare and excep-
tional circumstanc~s. and usua!lv substantial cor-
roboration is required. I, therefore, warn you, gentle-
men, that it is highly dangerous to convict on 
approver's evidence alone. There can, no doubt be 
a legal conviction upon the uncorroborated evi-
dence of an accomplice and, as already stated, 
the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice is 
strictly admissible and a conviction based on it alone 
is not illegal, yet you should remember, gentlemen, 
that experience teaches us that an accomplice being 
always an infamous person, he having thrown to the 
wolves his associates and friends in order to save his 
own skin and, though criminal, has purchased his 
liberty by betrayal, his evidence must be received 
with very great caution and it is highly dangerous 
to act upon his evidence unless it is materially 
corroborated. I must also tell you that this rule as 
to corroboration has become a settled rule of prac-
tice of so universal an application that it has now 
almost the force and reverence of law. Corrobora-
tion must be as to the crime and the identity of 
each one of the accused and the corroboration requir-
ed must be independent evidence, that is reliable 
evidence of another kind. 
S.O.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
129 
Evidence in corroboration must be independent 
testimony, which affects the accused by connecting 
or tending to connect the accused with the crime. 
In other words, it must be evidence which implicates 
him, that is, which conforms in some material parti-
culars not only the evidence that the crime has been 
committed but also that the prisoner (accused) 
committed it. Corroborative evidence, you should 
bear in mind, is evidence which shows or tends to 
show that the story of the accomplice that the 
accused committed the crime is true. The corrobor-
ation- need not be direct evidence that the accused 
committed the crime. It would be sufficient if it is 
merely circumstantial evidence of his connection with 
the crime. The corroboration in material particulars 
must be such as to connept or indentify each of the 
accused with the offence. In the present case, a 
previous statement of an approver, viz., the confes-
sion has been made exhibit before you, but that 
previous statement, you are further to bear in mind, 
cannot r.orroborate his latter statement, viz., the 
statements that have been made by him before you 
in this Court. 
· 
In dealing with the question what amount of 
corroboration is required you, gentlemen, must exer-
cise careful discrimination and look at all the 
surrounding circumstances in order to arrive at a 
conclusion whether the facts deposed to by the 
approver Sastipada are borne out by those circum-
stances. " 
· 
Mr. Umrigar on behalf of the appellant urged that 
the aforesaid direction given by Sessions Judge to the 
jury was not sufficient. The jury should have been 
told (1) in accordance with the decision of this Court 
in the case of Sarwan Singh v. The State of Punjab (1) 
that the approver's evidence has to satisfy a double 
test. It must show that he is a reliable witness and 
that his evidence receives sufficient corroboration, (2) 
that the evidence of an approver must be confirmed 
not only as to the circumstances of the crime but also 
as to the identity of the prisoner. The corrobor1~.tion 
(1) (1957] S.C.R. 9S~· 
17 
I959 
] nanendra N alll 
Chose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imsm], 
1959 
]nanendra·Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
130 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
ought to consist in circumstances that affects the 
identity of the party accused. Reliance was placed 
on the case of The King v. Baskerville (1), (3) that the 
circumstantial evidence corroborating the approver 
was not sufficient to connect the appellant with the 
murder of the deceased and (4) that on similar corrobor-
ation of the approver's testimony the accused J agdish 
Gorain had been acquitted. There was no real distinc-
tion between the case of J agdish Gorain and the 
appellant. 
It is true that in Sarwan Singh's case this Court had 
held, "The appreciation of an approver's evidence 
has to satisfy a double test. It must show that he is a 
reliable witness and that his evidence receives suffici-
ent corroboration and that is a test which is common 
to all witnesses. If this test is satisfied the second test 
which still remains to be applied is that the approver's 
evidence must receive sufficient corroboration. This 
test is special to the cases of weak or tainted evidence 
like that of the approver." These observations were 
made in the special circumstances of the case which 
this Court was deciding when dealing with the case of 
Sarwan Singh. This Court went on to observe, " The 
argument that the character of the approver's evid-
ence has 
not been considered by the High Court 
cannot be characterised as merely academic or theo-
retical in the present case because, as we shall presently 
point out, the evidence of the approver is so thoroughly 
discrepant that it would be difficult to resist the 
conclusion that the approver in the present case is a 
wholly unreliable witness. Indeed it may be legitimate 
to point out that the learned Judges of the High Court 
have themselves criticised the evidence of the approver 
in dealing with the prosecution case against Gurdial 
Singh and have ultimately found that the account 
given by the approver is unreliable and, though there 
was circumstantial evidence which raised an amount 
of suspicion against Gurdial Singh, that would not be 
enough to sustain his conviction. It seems to us that 
if it was found that the approver's account against 
one of the accused persons was wholly discrepant, this 
(I) (1916) • K.B.D. 658. 
-
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
131 
finding itself should inevitably have led the court to 
scrutinise his evidence in respect of the other accused 
persons with greater caution." It is clear therefore 
that in the special circumstances of the case of Sarwan 
Singh the approver had been found to be a wholly 
unreliable witness. It is important to observe that this 
Court stated that the approver's evidence must show 
that he is a reliable witness and that is the test which 
is common to all witnesses. Nothing has been shown 
to us in this case, as was shown in Sarwan Singh's 
case that apart from the approver's testimony in the 
present case being regarded as tainted evidence his 
evidence as it stood was in any way unreliable. 
Indeed, the Sessions Judge went to the length of 
telling the jury that although an approver's evidence 
is strictly admissible and a conviction is not illegal 
merely because it is based on an approver's evidence, 
it was a settled rule of practice not to convict a person 
on such evidence except under very rare and excep-
tional circumstances and usually substantial cor-
roboratLm was required. The jury could not have been 
more clearly warned about the danger of acting on an 
approver's evidence. In other words, the jury were 
told not to convict the appellant on the approver's 
evidence unless his evidence had been substantially 
corroborated. Apart from the question of corrobora-
tion of the approver's evidence nothing was suggested 
to us or to the High Court in what respect the 
approver's evidence was unreliable after testing his 
evidence in the same way as one would test the evid-
ence of any witness for the prosecution in a criminal 
case. In our opinion, the decision in Sarwan Singh's 
case can be distinguished in the present case. 
Obviously, it was never suggested that the approver's 
evid~nce in this case was entirely unreliable, if his 
evidence was tested in the same way as the evidence 
of any prosecution witness in a criminal trial. We 
cannot accept the submission made on behalf of the 
appellant that the charge to the jury is vitiated 
because of the decision of this Court in Sarwa.n Singh's 
case. 
I959 
j nanendra Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
I959 ' 
J nanendra Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The Slate of 
West Ben.gal 
Imam]. 
132 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
As to the second submission made by Mr. Umrigar 
it is to be remembered that in Baskerville's case the 
Court of Criminal Appeal in England after discussing 
various authorities on the subject came to the follow-
ing conclusion :-
" We hold that evidence in corroboration must be 
independent testimony which affects the accused by 
connecting or tending to connect him with the crime. 
In other words, it must be evidence which implicates 
him, that is, which confirms in some n;iaterial parti-
cular not only the evidence that the crime has been 
committed, but also that the prisoner committed it. 
The test applicable to determine the nature and 
extent. of the corroboration is thus the same whether 
the case falls within the rule of practice at common 
law or within that class of offences for which corro-
boration is required by statute. The language of the 
statute, implicates the accused, " compendiously in-
corporates the test applicable at common law in the 
rule of practice. The nature of the corroboration 
will necessarily vary according to the particular 
circumstances of the offence charged. It would be 
in high degree dangerous to attempt to formulate 
the kind of evidence which would be regarded as 
corroboration, except to say that corroborative 
evidence is evidence which shows or tends to show 
that the story of the accomplice that the accused 
committed the crime is true, not merely that the 
crime has been committed, but that it was commit-
ted by the accused. 
" The corroboration need not be direct evidence 
that the accused committed the crime; it is suffici-
ent if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his 
connection with the crime. " 
In the present case the jury had been clearly directed 
by the Sessions Judge that corroborative evidence 
must be evidence which implicates the accused, i.e., 
which confirms in some material particulars not only 
the evidence that the crime had been committed but 
also that the appellant had committed it. The 
Sessions Judge told the jury that "Corroborative 
-
s.c.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
133 
evidence, you should bear in mind, is evidence which 
shows or tends to show t"hat the story of the accomplice 
that the accused committed the crime is true. The 
corroboration need not be direct evidence that the 
accused committed the crime. It is sufficient if it is 
merely circumstantial evidence of his connection with 
the crime. The' corroboration in material particulars 
must be such a.s to connect or identify each of the 
accused with the offence. " It seems to us that the 
Sessions Judge directed the jury in accordance with 
the principle laid down in Baskerville's case and no 
serious objection can be taken to the manner in which 
the Sessions Judge directed, the jury in this respect. 
The moment there is corroborative evidence which 
connects or tends to connect an accused with the crime 
such corroborative evidence relates to the identity of 
the accused· in connection with that crime. It is the 
approver's evidence which is the direct evidence of the 
crime. There should be corroboration in material 
particulars not only concerning the crime but corrobor-
ation of the approver's story by evidence whi9h 
connects or tends to connect an accused with the 
crime. It is this corroborative evidence which deter-
mines the _mind of the Court or a jury that the 
approver's evidence that the accused committed the 
crime is true. 
As to the 3rd submission made on behalf of the 
appellant the following circumstances were established 
by the evidence which were accepted by the jury : 
L 
There was a motive for the appellant to 
commit the crime, that is to say, his immoral 
proposal to Lila, wife of the deceased. 
2. On the 25th of May, 1955, the appellant came 
to Lila's house and had a talk with the deceased. 
3. On the 26th of May, 1955, in the morning the 
appellant also came to the house and talked with 
the deceased. Later on that very day a little after 
sunset the appellant came to the house and asked 
the deceased to go for a walk with him. The 
deceased did so. ' 
4. Thereafter the appellant was seen going with 
Jagdish Gorain and the deceased by Brojeswari and 
I959 
J nanendra Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The Stale of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
z959 
Jumntlra Nath 
Glwss 
v. 
The Slate of 
Wesl Bengal 
·Imam]. 
134 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
Lila towards the north of the village after 5 p.m. 
while they were bathing in Talbona tank. 
5. According to the approver. at the time that 
the deceased was stabbed by the appellant he had 
sustained an injury on the dorsum of his left palm. 
The medical evidence established that the appellant 
had an almost healed up ulcer t inch in length on the 
left side of the palm at its posterior surface one inch 
belowthewrist joint and another healed up ulcer iinch 
in length on the left thumb at the posterior surface 
and that these injuries could be caused by a sharp 
cutting weapon like a knife. 
6. As it had become night and the deceased had 
not returned, Lila's mother Brojeswari and her 
uncle Radharaman Sadhu searched for him. They 
went to the club-house where the appellant and his 
two co-accused Jagdish Gorain and Sudhir Gorain 
and the approver used to associate with each other. 
When enquiries were made from the appellant by 
Brojeswari he first replied that the deceased had 
not gone with him and that he did not know 
anything about his whereabouts. When he was 
remainded that it was he who had taken the deceased 
for a walk which he was denying, the appellant 
replied that the deceased went with him upto the 
canal towards north of the village, but as he felt a. 
headache he came away and it was not possible for 
the appellant to give any news about the deceased's 
whereabouts. 
The above-mentioned 
circumstances either 
indi-
vidually or collectively may fall short of proving that 
the appellant committed the murder of the deceased. 
Indeed, the High Court was of the opinion that these 
circumstances independent of the direct evidence of 
the approver would not be sufficient to induce any 
reasonable person to come to the conclusion that the 
appellant had committed the crime. As already 
stated, however, the approver's evidence is the direct 
· evidence which establishes that the appellant had 
murdered the deceased. The jury had to decide for 
themselves whether the above-mentioned circum-
stances were sufficient corroborative evidence to satisfy 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
135 
them that the approver's evidence that the appellant 
murdered the deceased was true. It is, however, urged 
by Mr. Umrigar that the circumstances mentioned 
were not circumstances corroborating the evidence of 
the approver in material particulars which would 
connect or tend to connect the appellant with the 
crime. In our opinion, at least in one circumstance 
the corroboration is in a very material particular 
connecting or tending to connect the appellant with 
the crime. The approver's evidence that while the 
appellant was murdering the deceased he had received 
an injury on the dorsum of his left palm is corrobora.t. 
ed by the m_edical evidence. It was, however, pointed 
out that the medical evidence does not show that the 
injury was on the dorsum of the left palm. In our 
opinion, there is no substance in this submission 
because the first injury is described as one on the left 
side of the palm at its posterior surface I inch below the 
wrist joint, that is to say, the dorsum of the left pa.Im. 
The second injury is clearly on the left thumb at its 
posteri9r surface which is also consistent with the 
evidence of the approver that the dorsum of the left 
pa.Im was injured. The jury were entitled to accept 
this evidence as sufficient corroboration in a. material 
particular connecting the appellant or. tending to 
connect him with the crime. In addition, the cir· 
cumsta.nce that it was the appellant who had called 
for the deceased a little after sunset and ha.d·ta.ken 
him a.way and thereafter was seen going a.long towards 
the north of the village with the deceased and that 
thereafter the deceased was not seen a.live was one 
upon which the jury could rely in coming to the 
conclusion that it connected or tended to connect the 
appellant with the crime. The appellant's pretended 
ignorance of the whereabouts of the deceased that 
very night and his ultimate admission that he had 
ta.ken the deceased towards the north of the village 
was also a circumstance upon which the jury could 
rely as inconsistent with his innocence. In our 
opinion, all the circumstances referred to above were 
sufficient corroboration of the approver's evidence 
connecting or tending to connect the appellant with · 
I959 
] nantndra N allt 
Ghose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
1959 
Jnanmdra Nath 
Ghose 
v. 
The State of 
West Bengal 
Imam]. 
136 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960{1}] 
the crime and accordingly the approver's evidence 
that the appellant did commit the crime was true. 
As to the 4th submission that although there was 
similar corroboration of the approver's evidence 
against J agdish Gorain but he had been acquitted by 
the jury although no real distinction between his case 
and the case of the appellant arose is unsound as, in 
our opinion, the two cases are not comparable. In 
the first place, there "7as no motive for J agdish Gorain 
to commit the murder. In the second place, the injury 
which Jagdish received was while he caught the knife 
in the hand of the appellant saying "what have you 
done?" The approver's evidence therefore rather tended 
to show that he tried to prevent the appellant from 
further stabbing the deceased. 
These circumstances 
may have induced the jury to make a distinction 
between the case of Jagdish Gorain and the appel-
lant. It was for the jury to say whether they regarded 
the circumstantial evidence as sufficient to connect or 
tending to connect Jagdish with the crime. It would 
seem that on the approver's evidence the jury may 
well have regarded the circumstances as insufficient 
corroboration to connect or tending to connect J agdish 
Gorain with the crime. 
In our opinion, it. cannot be said with anygood 
reason that there was any defect in the charge to the 
jury delivered by the Sessions ;Judge which would 
justify us in saying that the verdict of the jury was 
vitiated. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. 
Appeal dismissed. 
