THE SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
THE TATA OIL MILLS CO. LTD. 
v. 
ITS WORKMEN AND OTHERS 
(S. R. DAS, C.J., N. H. BHAGWATI, s. K. DAS, 
P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR and K. N. WANCHoo, JJ.) 
Industrial Disp11.te--l3onus-Gross Profits-Extraneom income 
-Profit unrelated to effort of labour-Available surplus-Prior 
charges-Retitrn on depredation reserve used as working capital. 
In resisting the workmen's claim for bonus for the year 
1955-56 the appellant contended that in calculating gross profits 
for the purpose of the Full Bench formula the following items of 
income should be excluded :-
(i) Income earned by way of rent, light and power ; 
(ii) estate revenue derived from sale of excess coconuts used 
in preparing oil grown in the appellant's groves; 
(iii) profit from sale of empty barrels ; and 
(iv) sale proceeds of tin cans, scraps, Jogs, planks, gunnies 
etc. 
as they were extraneous income unrelated to the efforts of the 
workmen. 
The appellant also claimed that a profit of Rs. 3 lacs appear-
ing in the accounts due to a change in the method of valuation 
was no real profit due to the efforts of Jabour and should not be 
taken into account. In calculating the available surplus the 
appellant claimed that it was entitled to 4% interest on the 
depreciation reserve used as working capital. 
Held, that the four items were earned by the appellant in 
the normal cour1>e of its business and could not be excluded from 
the gross profits on the ground that it had not been proved that 
thev were the result of the direct efforts of labour in the bonus 
y~a·r. Though there must be contribution of the workmen in 
earning profits before they could be entitled to profit bonus, it 
was not necessary to establish direct connection between the 
efforts of the workmen and each item of profit earned. Profits 
earned in the normal course of business were generally the result 
of the joint effort of capital and labour. Income or profit may 
be extraneous if it either did not really arise in that year or it 
arose out of fortuitous circumstances altogether unconnected with 
the efforts of labour or arose out of sale of fixed or capital assets. 
z959 
May5. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
r959 
Mill Owners 
Association, Bombay v. The Rashtriya Mill 
-
Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay, (r950) L.L.J. r247, Shalimar Roj>e Works 
The Tata Oil Mills Mazdoor U11ion, Howrah v. Shalimar Rope Works Ltd., Howrah, 
\ 
Co., Ltd. 
(r956) 2 L.L.J. 371, referred to. 
v. 
Its TVorkmen and 
Others 
The profit of Rs. 3 lacs due to change in the method of 
accounting was extraneous income and had to be excluded. It 
was not income in the normal course of business as it ¥1as not 
likely to arise again. It had arisen out of fortuitous circum-
stances and had nothing whatsoever to do with the efforts of 
labour. 
The appellant was entitled to a 4 % return on the deprecia-
tion reserves used as working capital. lf reserves were not used 
for this purpose the concern would have to borrow money and 
pay interest thereon. 
CIVIL 
APPELLATE 
Ju&rSDIOTION: 
Civil Appeal 
No. 321 of 1958. 
Appeal by special leave from the Award dated the 
September 27, 1957, of the Industrial Tribunal, 
Bombay, in Reference (I.T.) No. 119 of 1957. 
G. K. Daphmry, Solicitor-General of India, J. B. 
Da.dachanji and S. N. Andley, for the appellant. 
Rajani Patel and Janardan Sharma for respondent 
No. l. 
1959. May 5. 
The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by 
Wanehoo/. 
WANCHOO J.-This is an appeal by special leave 
against the award of the Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, 
in a dispute between the Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd., 
Bombay (hereinafter !"eferred to as the company) 
and its workmen, in the matter of profit bonus (or the 
year 1955-56. The dispute arose over a demand made 
by the workmen for payment unconditionally as bonus 
for the year 1955-56 of a sum equivalent to four 
months' wages/salary for all employees drawing 
wages/salary of less than Rs. 500 per mensem. This 
dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal by the 
Government of Bombay by its order dated June 18, 
1957. The company had already paid 2! months' 
basic wages as bonus to its workmen and the real 
dispute was thus only about the remaining bonus for 
a month and half. 
' ' 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
3 
The ease of the workmen was that the company had 
z959 
f made record profits during the year and declared a 
-
dividend of 12 per centum free of income-tax1 the The Tata Oil Milli 
workmen were getting much less than the living wage 
Co •• Ltd. 
and the dearness allowance was not sufficient to fill the Its wor~;,,en and 
gap, and, therefore, profit bonus at the rate of four 
Others 
months' basic wages should be granted. The company, 
on the other hand, contended that it was paying 
Wanchoo 1; 
graded scale of wages with annual and biennial 
~ increments and had already paid profit bonus for 2~­
months. It was not possible for the company to pay 
more than that as bonus. as the available surplus 
according to the Full Bench formula did not justify it. 
It was also pointed out that thobgh the company 
started as far back as 1917, the shareholders began to 
get dividends only from 1940, and, therefore, a dividend 
of 12 per centum free of income-tax was in the circum-
stances not high. The company also claimed that in 
<( making calculations for the purposes of the Full Bench. 
formula certain items of extraneous income should not 
be taken into account. Next it claimed that a profit 
of Rs. 3 lacs appearing in the accounts due to the 
change in the method of valuation was no real profit 
due to the efforts of labour and should not be taken 
into account in arriving at the available surplus. 
Lastly, it also claimed that it was entitled to 4 per 
centum interest on the working capital, including the 
a.mount in the depreciation fund. 
The Industrial Tribunal disallowed the claim of the 
company on all these three points and after making 
relevant calculations came to the conclusion that there 
was a sufficient surplus available to permit the grant 
of bonus for 3l months calculated on basic wages and1 
therefore awarded the same. The company thereupon 
applied for special leave to appeal, which was granted; 
and that is how the matter has now come up before 
us for decision. 
We shall first take the question of extraneous in-
come. Six items were sought to be excluded by the 
company as extraneous income, and they were these : 
4 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
I959 
Tht Tata Oil llfills 
Co., Ltd. 
v. 
Its Worhn1tn and 
Others 
U1anchoo ]. 
(i) Income earned by way of rent, \ight 
and power 
(ii) Estate Revenue 
(iii) Profit on sale of empty barrels 
(iv) Excess provision for expenses in the 
previous year 
{v) Refund of income-tax on revision of 
Cochin assessment of Excess Profits Tax 
(vi) Sale proceeds of tin cans, scraps, logs, 
planks, gunnies &c. 
Total 
In lacs 
Rs. 
0•24 
0·08 
0·89 
0·31 
0·49 
2·u 
4·12 
The Tribunal rejected the claim with respect to all 
these items, though in the judgment it mentioned only 
items (i), (ii), (iii) and (vi) as those in dispute. 
Apparently, items (iv) and (v) were not in dispute 
before it; but while making calculations, it seems to 
have lost sight of this and disallowed thll claim with 
respect to these two items also. Learned counsel for 
the rcspondent,s appearing before us has stated that 
the claim with respect to items (iv) and (v) was con-
ceded bv the workmen before the Tribunal and it 
seems t.Jiat by over-sight these items were not excluded 
by it.. 
He .fairly concedes that these two items may be 
excluded from consideration in making calculations 
for arriving at the available surplus. We are thus left 
with four items, which were disallowed by the Tribunal. 
The reason given by the Tribunal for disallowing these 
items was that they formed part of the profits earned 
in the course of the company's business .and there was 
no goocl reason for deducting them from the profits. It 
further \milt on to say that <lS regards income earned 
by way of rent. light and power it was not disputed 
that expenditure in respect of buildings from which the 
rent was derived, such as on rep<>irs and maintenance, 
is iuclnded in the expenditure 8ide of the account, and 
taxes and rates for these buildings were paid by the 
company. There was thus no reason for deducting 
this amount from the profits. It did not consider the 
' 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COUR'f REPORTS 
5 
other three items specifically and was content to 
z959 
include them on the general ground that they were The T ~a M"ll 
profits earned in the course of the company's business. 
~~~.Ltd. ' s 
Mr. Daphtary appearing for the company has drawn 
v. 
our attention to a number of cases decided by indus-
Its Workmen and 
trial tribunals as well as labour appellate tribunals, 
Others 
where such items of income have been excluded on 
wanchoo J. 
the ground that they are extraneous income unrelated 
to the efforts of the workmen. 
\Ve do not think it 
{ necessary to refer to all these decisions and it is suf-
ficient to say that these decisions support the conten-
tion put forward. The main reason given in these 
decisions for excluding what is termed as extraneous 
income is that they are unrelated t.o the efforts of 
workmen. \Ve may refer only to two of these decisions 
of the labour appellate tribunal in this connection. In 
The Mill-Owners' Association, Bombay v. The Rashtriya 
,j Mill .Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay (1) in which the ]'ull 
Bench formula was evolved, the appellate tribunal 
rernal'ked at page 1257: 
" No scheme of allocation of bonus could be 
complete if the amount out of which a bonus is to be 
paid is unrelated to employees' efforts." 
The Appellate Tribunal reiterated this in Shalimar 
RO'pe Works Mazdoor Union, How1·ah v. Messrs. Shali-
mar Rope Works Ltd., Shalimar, Howrah( 2) by observ-
ing at page 372 that " it is however too late in the 
day to question tlie view that there are profits un-
~ 
related to workers' efforts and referred to as 'extraneous 
profits' and that such profits must be left out of 
account in deciding the question whether there is 
available surplus in any particular year." Income 
received by way of rent of quarters and by sale of 
scrap-materials has generally been treated as extra-
neous income by the industrial tribunals on the basis 
of these decisions of the Labour Appellate Tribunal. 
It is the correctness of this view which has been can-
1 vassed before us in this appeal. Reliance has also 
been placed by some tribunals on the decision of this 
Court in Muir Mills Co. Ltd. v. Suti Mills Mazdoor 
(1) 1950 L,L.J, U47. 
(2) 1956 (II) L.L.J. 371. 
6 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
r959 
Union, Kanpu1' (1), in this connection. 
This Court 
T ' 
T --0 .1 M. observed at page 998 as follows: 
nt 
ala 
i 
ills 
co., Ltd. 
"There arc however two conditions which have 
v. 
to be satisfied before a demand for bonus can be justifi-
11' Wo,kmw and ed, and they are, (1) when wages fall short of the 
Othm 
living standard and (2) the industry makes huge pro-
Wanchoo .f. 
fits part of which are due to the contribution which 
the workmen make in increasing production." 
It was fort.lier observed at page 999-
"lt is therefore cle.ar that the claim for bonus 
can be made by the employees only if as n result of 
the joint contribution of capital and labour the indus-
t.rinl concern has earned profits. If in any particular 
year the working of the industrial concern has resulted 
in loss t.hnre is no basis nor justification for n demand 
for bonus.,. 
, 
H is clettr from these observations that this Court 
was not de>tling with the question of extraneous income • 
as such in the 1l!uir 1lfills Case (1). The principles laid 
down in that case show that there must be profits in 
the particular year for which bonus is claimed, result-
ing in nn available smplus before profit bonus can be 
awarded. It is only when profits are made that 
profit bonus can be 11w1trded, subject to two further 
conditions, n:i,mely, (1) W>tges fall short of the living 
standard and (2) the industry makes large profits part 
of which are duo to the contribution which the work-
men make in produrtion. It is this last condition 
which seems to have been relied upon by industrial 
• 
tribunals in holding that there must be direct ctmnec-
tion hetween the efforts of labour and the profits, and 
unless that direct connection is established the profits 
must be treated as unrelated to the efforts of labour 
and thus become extraneous income. There is no 
doubt that there must be contribution of the workmen 
in earning profits before they are entitled to profit 
bonus; but it wa.s not laid down in the Muir Mills \ 
Case(') that direct connection between the efforts of the 
workmen and the particular item of profit earned must 
be established before the profit can be taken into 
account for the purposes of arriving at the available 
(1) 1955 (1) S.C.R. 991. 
, • 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME UOURT REPORTS 
7 
surplus. An industrial concern carries on a certain 
r959 
business. 
In carrying on that business it employs Th T 
Oil M'll 
capita.I as well as labour, and generally speaking the 
8 
~;~ Ltd. 
• s 
profits earned in the normal course of business at t4e 
v. 
end of year are the result of the joint effort of capital Its Workmen and 
and labour. Even so, it may be recognized that there 
Others 
may be instauees of extraneous income for the pur-
pose of the ]'ull Bench formula due (i) either to some 
part of the profits not having bee°t earned in that year, 
(ii) or to some part of profits arising out of fortuitous 
circumstances altogether unconnected with the efforts 
of labour. 
A third category may be the income 
arising out of sale of fixed or capital assets. Such 
income or profit may be called extraneous income as 
either it did not really arise in that year or though it 
has arisen in that year, labour has not contributed 
anything towards its accrual ; it may therefore not be 
taken into account in calculations according to the 
Full Bench formula. 
But apart from these cases, we 
cannot see how income arising during the year in the 
normal course of business of the concern can be called 
extraneous income merely on the ground that no direct 
connection between the efforts of labour and the 
accrual of the income has been established. In this 
very case we find an instance of the first category in 
two items relating to return of excess provision for 
expenses and refund of excess profits tax. These two 
amounts have gone to swell the profits of this year; 
hut they have not arisen in this year and may, there-
fore, properly be treated as extraneous income. An 
instance of the second kind is to be found in the profit 
of Rs. 3 lacs made in this year by a change in the 
method of valuation of the company's assets, which is 
entirely unconnected with the efforts of labour. But so 
far as the other four items are concerned, they are 
earned by the company in the normal course of its 
business and there is no reason why they should be 
excluded on the ground that it has not been proved 
that they are the result of direct efforts of labour in 
this year. 
Let us take these four items one by one. The first 
is the item of income earned by way of rent, light and 
Wanchoo ]. 
8 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
x959 
power. It is well known that many industrial concerns 
'1 he Tata Oil Mills provide amenities for their workmen by building 
co., Ltd. 
quarters, which are provided with light and power 
v. 
from the concern's power house. The quarters and, 
Its Workmen and power-house are built out of capital or profits earned 
Others 
in past years. If they are built out of ca pita!, there is 
wanchoo J. 
provision for a return which is generally at 6 per 
centum on the paid-up capital. Even if they are 
built out of past prpfits, the depreciation and rehabili-
tation charges fall on the gross profits before the 
available surplus is arrived at. 
Besides, expenditure 
with regard to repairs and maintenance, and rates and 
taxes is all paid out of the income of the concern 
before the gross profits are arrived at. In other words 
these expenses are paid out of the profits in the earning 
· of which the workmen have contributed their labour. 
How can the company claim to exclude the rent etc., 
from the profits while meeting the expenditure relating 
to such assets out of the profits, part of which is 
att.ributable to the efforts of labour? In short, income 
by way of rent, light and power arises in the normal 
course of business of the concern and there is no reason 
why a direct contribution by labour during the year 
in question must be insisted upon in the case of such 
income. The company must also be employing some 
labour for purposes of maintenance and repairs of the 
quarters aud power-house, even though the labour 
may not be wholly allocated to this work only. We 
are, therefore, of opinion that income from rent, light 
and power arises in the normal course of business of a 
concern and cannot be treated as extraneous income in 
the sense described above. 
The next item is estate revenue. 
We are told that 
the company has coconut groves, which produce 
coconuts used in preparing oil which is one of the 
main items of the company's business. We are also 
told that sometimes the entire produce of these groves 
is not used in the manufacture of oil and therefore 
some part of the produce is sold. This income is out 
of this part sold in the market. Here again the income 
arises in the normal course of business and the expenses 
for looking after and maintaining the groves are paid 
1 
•
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
9 
by the company and entered into its account. The 
z959 
company must also be employing labour to look after The Tata Oil Mills 
the groves. In these circumstances we fail to see why 
co., Ltd. 
this income by sale of surplus coconuts should be 
v. 
excluded from the profits for the purpose of the Full Its Workmen anrl 
Bench formula. 
Others 
Then we come to the profit on sale of empty barrels 
WanchooJ. 
and sale proceeds of tin cans, scraps, logs, planks, 
gunnies etc. These items may be taken together, for 
the nature of the receipt is the same, though on account 
of the method of accounting employed, the income in 
the case of barrels is shown as profit while in the case 
of scrnps etc., it is shown as sale proceeds. It is said 
that this is extraneous income because it is unrelated 
to the efforts of labour. We cannot accept this con-
tention, for this income again is in the normal course 
of business. Further when the company buys chemi-
cals (for example), it pays for the chemicals as well 
as the containers, namely, the barrels. When the 
chemicals are used up these empty barrels are sold. 
Whatever is the income from the sale of these barrels 
is in reality a reduction in the cost price of chemicals 
to the company, though by the method of accounting 
employed it may appear as profit on the sale of 
barrels. We see no reason why the reduction in cost 
price of chemicals should not be taken into account for 
the purpose of arriving at gross profits in making 
calculations for the Full Bench formula. Some scraps 
are normally left over in the process of manufacture. 
Whatever income is derived from such scraps also 
goes to reduce the cost price of materials used in 
production and thus to increase the profits. We do not 
see why this income arising in the normal course of the 
company's business should not be taken into account 
on the plea that labour has not directly contributed in 
its accrual. We are, therefor<\ of opinion that all these 
four items were rightly taken into account by the 
Tribunal in arriving at the gross profits. 
Then we come to the profit of Rs. 3 lacs made by a 
change in the method of accounting. The Tribunal 
did not accept this income as extraneous and in so 
doing it fell into error. 
This income of Rs. 3 lacs has 
2 
10 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
'959 
nothing whatsoever to do with the efforts of labour, 
Th T -Oil M'll even though it has arisen this year. It has arisen out 
e 
ala 
• s f 
.c t "t 
, 
t 
. 
h 
th' 
co .. Ltd. 
o a ior m ous circums ance masmuc 
as 
is year 
v. 
there was a change in the basis of valuation of stock. 
Its Workmen and It is not income in the normal course of business, 
Others 
because it is not likely to arise ever again. In the 
Wanchooj, 
circumstances this income of Rs. 3 lacs must be treated 
as extraneous income and excluded for the purpose of 
calculations based on the Full Bench formula. 
The last item with which we are concerned is the 
return on the amount of depreciation reserve used as 
working capital. An affidavit was made on behalf of 
the company that it had used its reserve funds com-
prising premium on ordinary shares, general reserve, 
depreciation reserve, workmen's compensation reserve, 
employees' gratuity reserve, bad and doubtful debt 
reserves and sales promotion reserve as working 
capital. The Tribunal, however, allowed return at 4 
per centum on a working capital of Rs. 31·88 lacs. 
This excluded the depreciation reserve but included all 
other reserves which were claimed by the company 
and having been used for working capital. The Tribu-
nal gave no reason why it excluded the amount of the 
depreciatiGn reserve in arriving at the figure of work-
ing capital. A return is allowed on the reserves used 
as working capital on the ground that if these reserves 
are not used for this purpose, the concern would have 
to borrow money and pay interest on that. This being 
the basis on which a return on reserves used as work-
ing capital is allowed, there is no reason why, if there 
is in fact money available in the depreciation reserve 
and if that money is actually used during the year as 
working capital, a return should not be allowed on 
such money also. Further if the money has been con-
verted into such assets as stock in trade and stores 
etc., (i.e., other than capital or fixed assets), it will be 
obviously available from year to year to that extent as 
. working capital subject to adjustments on account of 
loans, secured or otherwise. 
Learned counsd for the 
respondents wanted to contest that the whole amount 
in the depreciation reserve was not available for being 
used as working capital. It is enough to say that the 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME ·coURT REPORTS 
11 
affidavit of the Chief Accountant filed on behalf of the 
z959 
co~pany was not challenged before the Industrial The Tata Oil Mills 
Tribunal on behalf of the respondents. It would, 
co., Ltd. 
therefore, be impossible for us now to over-look that 
v. 
affidavit, particularly when the Tribunal gave no Its Workmen and 
reason why it treated the working capital as Rs. 31·88 
Others 
lacs only. So far therefore as the present year is con-
Wamhoof. 
cerned, we must accept the affidavit and hold that the 
working capital was Rs. 139·09 lacs. It will, however, 
be open to the workmen in future to show by proper 
cross-examination of the company's witnesses or by 
proper evidence that the amount shown as the depre-
ciation reserve was not available in whole or in part 
to be used as working capital and that whatever may 
be available was not in fact so used in the sense 
explained above. In the present appeal, however, we 
must accept the affidavit of the Chief Accountant. The 
Tribunal allowed 4 per centum interest on the working 
0apital and that must be allowed on the total sum of 
Rs. 139·09 lacs. 
We now come to the calculations in accordance with 
the Full Bench formula, subject to what we have said 
above: 
Profit for th.-. year ... 
Add provision for -
Rs. in lacs 
Rs. in lacs 
15•53 
(i) tax ........................... . 
(ii) depreciation .............. . 
14•51 
11•75 
(iii) bonus ........................ . 
7•76 
34·02 
Gross Profits. 
Less extraneous income 
Balance ................. . 
Less notional normal depreciation 
Balance ................. . 
Less income-tax payable a.ocording to 
Meenakshi Mills case (1) (PCT Note A 
Below). 
Balance ...• ...,,. .......... . 
49·55 
3·80 
45·75 
11·12 
34•63 
15•90 
J.8·73 
'959 
The Tata Oil Mills 
Co., Ltd. 
v. 
Its Worknien and 
Others 
ivanchoo j. 
12 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)) 
Rs. in lacs 
Rs. in lacs 
Less dividend on paid-up 
5•54 
capital 
Less return on Reserves used 
5•56 
as working capital of Rs. 
139·09 @ Rs. 4 per cent. 
U·lO 
Available surplus 
7•63 
Less bonus actually paid 
7·90 
Less rebate of income-tax at 
3•40 
-/7/- in the rupee .. 
4•50 
Amount remaining with the Company..... 
3·13 
Note A. 
Gross Profits 
Less total statutory 
depreciation 
Rs. in lacs 
49•55 
13·19 
Balance...... 
36·36 
Income-tax at -/7/- in 15·90 
a rupee 
The available surplus· of profit thus works out at 
Rs. 7·63 lacs. The company has already paid 2t 
months' bonus amounting to Rs. 7•90 lacs to the 
workmen. The company would be entitled to a rebate 
of Rs. 3·40 lacs on this sum and therefore the amount 
which the company has actually to pay is Rs. 4·50 
lacs. 
This will leave a sum of Rs. 3·13 lacs out of the 
available surplus with the company for its use. It will 
be seen that more than half the available surplus has 
already gone to labour according to what the company 
has paid. There are three sharers in the available 
surplus, namely, the industry, share-holders and 
labour. In the circumstances no case has been made 
out for increasing the profit bonus beyond what the 
•
•
company has already paid, particularly when we find 
i 
that the company has claimed no rehabilitation 
charges in this year. We, therefore, itllow the appeal, 
set aside the order of the Industrial Tribunal and 
dismiss the claim of the workmen for any bonus 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
13 
beyond what has already been granted by the com-
r959 
pany. In the particular circumstances of this case, The Tata Oil Mills 
we order the parties to bear their own costs. 
Co., Ltd. 
v. 
Appeal allowed. 
GREAT INDIAN MOTOR WORKS LTD., 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
THEIR EMPLOYEES AND OTHERS 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR 
and K. N. WANCHOO, JJ.) 
Industrial Dispute-Award against company in liquidation-
Appeal by managing director and auction-pu.rchaser not aggrieved by 
the award-Summary dismissal by Appellate Tribunal-Validity-
Right of appeal-Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, z950 
(48 of z950), s. z20-Companies Act z956 (I of z956), s. 457. 
The discharged employees of the Company in liquidation 
raised an industrial dispute wherein the auction-purchaser of the 
Company was also impleaded as a party. The Tribunal, inter 
alia, held that no relationship of employer and employee existed 
between the auction-purchaser and the t:ild staff who had been 
discharged prior to the purchase of the business, and the reference 
so far as the auction-purchaser was concerned was incompetent. 
The Tribunal directed the liquidators to pay compensation to the 
discharged employees. 
The liquidators were refused sanction to appeal from the 
said award by the High Court whereupon the auction-purchaser 
who was also the managing director of the Company, prior to 
its liquidation, preferred an appeal in the name of the Company 
represented by himself as the managing director and also in his 
capacity as the auction-purchaser of the Company. The Appel-
late Tribunal dismissed the appeal in limine as incompetent in 
view of the provisions of s. 457 of the Companies Act 1956, on 
the ground that the appeal was not maintainable as it was not 
authorised by the High Court. 
JI eld, that where a party to the Reference in an industrial 
dispute was exonerated from its terms, and no Award was made 
against him, he could not be sairl to be an aggrievc-d party, 
thereby attracting the provisions of s. 12 of the Industrial 
Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act HJSO, and any appeal by him 
from the said Award will be incompetent. 
Its Workmen and 
Others 
Wanchooj. 
I959 
May6. 
