S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
13 
beyond what has already been granted by the com-
r959 
pany. In the particular circumstances of this case, The Tata Oil Mills 
we order the parties to bear their own costs. 
Co., Ltd. 
v. 
Appeal allowed. 
GREAT INDIAN MOTOR WORKS LTD., 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
THEIR EMPLOYEES AND OTHERS 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR 
and K. N. WANCHOO, JJ.) 
Industrial Dispute-Award against company in liquidation-
Appeal by managing director and auction-pu.rchaser not aggrieved by 
the award-Summary dismissal by Appellate Tribunal-Validity-
Right of appeal-Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, z950 
(48 of z950), s. z20-Companies Act z956 (I of z956), s. 457. 
The discharged employees of the Company in liquidation 
raised an industrial dispute wherein the auction-purchaser of the 
Company was also impleaded as a party. The Tribunal, inter 
alia, held that no relationship of employer and employee existed 
between the auction-purchaser and the t:ild staff who had been 
discharged prior to the purchase of the business, and the reference 
so far as the auction-purchaser was concerned was incompetent. 
The Tribunal directed the liquidators to pay compensation to the 
discharged employees. 
The liquidators were refused sanction to appeal from the 
said award by the High Court whereupon the auction-purchaser 
who was also the managing director of the Company, prior to 
its liquidation, preferred an appeal in the name of the Company 
represented by himself as the managing director and also in his 
capacity as the auction-purchaser of the Company. The Appel-
late Tribunal dismissed the appeal in limine as incompetent in 
view of the provisions of s. 457 of the Companies Act 1956, on 
the ground that the appeal was not maintainable as it was not 
authorised by the High Court. 
JI eld, that where a party to the Reference in an industrial 
dispute was exonerated from its terms, and no Award was made 
against him, he could not be sairl to be an aggrievc-d party, 
thereby attracting the provisions of s. 12 of the Industrial 
Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act HJSO, and any appeal by him 
from the said Award will be incompetent. 
Its Workmen and 
Others 
Wanchooj. 
I959 
May6. 
14 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
r959 
No person other than the Official Liquidator, who is placed 
in charge of the affairs of the Company in the process of winding 
Great Indian 
up, is authorised with the sanction of the Court to institute any 
Motor Works Ltd., suit, prefer an appeal or other legal proceedings in the name and 
and Another 
on behalf of the Company. 
v. 
Held, further, that there is no inconsistency betweens. 457 
Their Employees of the Companies Act r956 and s. r2 of the Industrial Disputes 
and Others 
(Appellate Tribunal) Act r950. But in construing the provisions 
of s. r2 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act r950, 
if there was anything in the Companies Act, r956, with particular 
reference to s. 457 which was inconsistent with the provisions of 
Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act r950, the latter Act 
shall prevail. 
Section 457 of the Companies Act r956, concerns a very 
special case, it only lays down a condition precedent to the filing 
of a case if it has to be by the liquidator of a company in the 
process of winding up. 
Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) 
Act r950 is the usual statutory provision which permits an appeal 
to be presented to the Appellate Tribunal, which otherwise would 
not lie, by any party who is aggrieved. by an award; it docs not 
either in express terms or by necessary iinplication override, 
abrogate or modify the provisions of s. 457 of the Com~·anies Act 
1956, nor does it do away with the necessity for the requisite 
sanction of the court which is a condition precedent so far as the 
liquidator is concerned to institute any suit or proceedings in the 
name or on behalf of the company in liquidation. 
In the instant case the appeal purported to be filed on behalf 
of the Company in liquidation through its managing director was 
wholly incompetent ; an.d the second appellant, the auction-
purchascr, could not be said to the aggrieved party enabling him 
to invoke s. 12 of the Act. 
CIVIL APPELLATE Ju&rsmc·rrnN: Civil Appeal No. 
447 of 1957. 
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and 
order dated the 1st August 1956 of the Labour Appel-
late Tribunal of India, Culcutta in Appeal No. Cal.-107 
of 1956. 
D. N. Mukherjee, for the appellants. 
Y. J{ uma.r, for the respondent. 
1959. May 6. 
The Judgment of the Court was 
•
•
• 
delivered by 
I 
Sinha]. 
SINIIA J.-This appeal by special leave, is directed 
against the order of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, 
dated August I, 1!)56, dismissing in limine the appeal 
... 
S.C.R. 
SUPl~EME COURT REPOR,TS 
15 
against the Award of the Third Industrial Tribunal, 
r959 
dated March 8, 1956. The Great Indian Motor Works 
G 
nd. 
Ltd., now in liquidation (hereinafter referred to as Mot::~:,k;~~d. 
'the Company'), represented by one of the Managing 
and Another ' 
Directors, K. D. Nundy, is the first appellant. The 
v. 
said K. D. N nndy, in his capacity as the credit.or of Their Employees 
the Company and/or as the auction-purchaser of the 
and Others 
Company, is the second appellant. One hundred and 
forty two employees of the Company, represented by 
the Bus Workers' Union, are collectively the first 
respondent. 
The second and third respondents, 
C. D. N undy and D. L. Dutt, are the Official Liquida. 
tors of the Company, appointed by the High Court as 
such. 
The relevant facts are these: The Company was 
incorporated and registered under the Indian Com-
panies Act, 1913, in 1926, as a private limited company 
with its registered office at Calcutta. Its business was 
mainly that of carrying on public transport on Route 
No. 14 in the City of Calcutta, as also of dealers in 
and repairers of motor vehicles. It had an authorized 
capital of six lacs of rupees divided into 600 shares of 
Rs. 1,000 each, out of 'which, shares worth Rs. 4,00,000 
only had been subscribed and paid up. The registered 
share-holders of the Company, were Kristo Das Nundy, 
the second appellant, having 246 shares; Chandy Das 
Nundy, respondent No. 2, having 142 shares, and 
Kumar Kartick Charan Mullick, holding 12 shares, 
each of the face value of Rs. 1,000. On account of 
financial difficulties and disputes between its share-
holders, an application for compulsory winding up of 
the Company was made by the said respondent No. 2, 
on the Original Side in the High Court at Calcutta.. 
On July 23, 1951, an order for winding up the 
Company was made, and the Official Receiver was 
appointed the Official Liquidator of the Company. 
An appeal against the order aforesaid, was dismissed 
on December 5, 1951, and the order for winding up the 
Company, stood confirmed. 
By an order dated 
December 11, 1951, the Official Receiver was dis-
charged and the respondents 2 and 3 aforesaid, were 
appointed Joint official liquidators in his place, with 
Sinha ]. 
16 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
power to sell the business of the Company as a going 
G -, 
1 d' 
concern. In April, 1953, the list of the creditors of 
rea 
n tan 
Motor works Ltd .• the Company was settled by the Court, and the second 
and Another 
appellant aforesaid, was included in the list as a 
v. 
creditor for the largest amount, namely, Rs. 2,35,818. 
Their Employees It may be added that the discharged employees of the 
andOtliers 
C 
· 1 d d' 
h 1 
ompany were not me u e 
111 t e ist of creditors thus 
Sinha .r. 
sottled by the Court. 
After several infructuous 
attempts for selling the property by auction, on May 4, 
1954, the Court ordered the sale of the Company's 
business free from all encumbrances, out-goings and 
liabilities, to the highest bidder, subject to confirmation 
by the Court. 
The second appellant bid for the 
purchase of the business with the leave of the Court, 
and he was declared the highest bidder and purchaser 
of the business for Rs. 1,42,500 at the sale held on 
June 12, 1954. The said sale was confirmed by the 
Calcutta High Court on July 5, 1954. On July 23, 
1954, the Official Liquidators issued a notice terminat-
ing the services of all the employees of the Company 
with effect from July 24, 1954, except one Assistant 
and one clerk, whose services were retained until the 
winding up proceedings were completed. On July 24, 
the Official Liquidators put the appellant No. 2, the 
auction-purchaser, in possession of the busi!'1e~s of the 
Company, which is now being carried on by the second 
appellant as the sole proprietor. 
, As a result of the termination of the services of the 
one hundred and forty two employees of the Company, 
as aforesaid, an industrial dispute was raised at the 
instance of the said employePs whose list is attached 
to the order of Reference, dated August 26, 1954, 
which is in these terms:-
"Whereas an Industrial dispute exists between (1) 
Messrs. Great Inciian l\Iotor Works Ltd., 33, Rowland 
Road, Calcutta, 
represented 
by their Managing 
Directors Sri C. D. Nundy and Sri K. D. Nundy, (2) 
Official Liquidators of the Company, Sri D. L. Dutta 
and Sri C. D. Nundy, 33, Rowland Road, Calcutta 
and (3) Sri K. D. Nundy, Auction Purchaser of the 
Company, 33, Rowland Road, Calcutta, and their 142, 
employees, given in the enclosed list, represented by 
• 
• 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
17 
the Bus Workers' Union, 249, Bowbazar Street, 
r959 
Calcutta, regarding t,he matters specified in the 
G 
. 
h d 1 
' 
· 
reat Indian 
SC e U e; 
Motor Works Lid., 
And whereas it is expedient that the said dispute 
and Another 
should he referred to an Industrial Tribunal constitut-
v. 
ed under section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, Their Employees 
1947(XIVofl947); 
. 
andOthers 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred 
s;,.1iaf. 
by section 10 of the said Act, the Governor is pleased 
hereby to refer the said dispute to the Third Industrial 
Tribunal constituted under Notification No. 592 
Dis./D/12L-5/12 dated the 23rd :February, 1953 for 
adjudication. 
The said Third Industrial Tribunal shall meet at 
such places and on such dates as it may direct. 
SCHEDULE 
1. 
Whether the notice dated 23rd July, 1954, of 
termination of services of 142 employees with effect 
from 24-7-54 issued by the Joint Official Liquidators, 
was justified ? 
2. 
Whether the refusal of the auction-purchaser to 
continue the employment of the 142 employees was 
justified? 
3. 
What reliefs are the employees entitled to ? 
By order of the Governor." 
The employees of the Company had moved the High 
Court for directions to the Liguidators for the 
payment of their dues from the Company. The Court, 
by its order dated September 8, 1954, directed the 
Liquidators to pay within a week the arrears of salary 
of all the workmen, and also within a week from 
receiving sale proceeds of the auction-sale aforesaid, to 
pay the workers, in lieu of notice, one week's wages to 
weekly paid workmen, two weeks' wages to fortnightly 
paid workmen, and one month's wages to monthly paid 
workmen. The Directors were to hold the balance of 
the sale proceeds till further orders of the Court. 
It will be noticed from the order of reference, quoted 
above, that besides the Official Liquidators, the second 
appellant was also impleaded as a party to the Refe-
rence, in his capacity as the auction-purchaser of the 
Company. In his written statement before the Third 
3 
18 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
(1960(1)] 
r959 
Industrial Tribunal of West Bengal, which was in 
Great Indian 
seizin of the case, the auction-purchaser, now the 
Jiotor Wmk« Ud., second appellant, aft.er reciting the facts and circum-
ond Anoth" 
Stances leading up to his auction-purchase, as afore. 
v. 
said, contended that as an auction-purchaser, he was 
Thefr Emptnyccs not in any event liable for any compensation or does, 
and Others 
1 · 
d b 
h 
] 
h 
b 
as c anne 
y t e wor rn1en; t,hat e was not ound to 
Si11haj. 
reinstate the old employees of the Company; that 
having purchased the business free from any encum-
brances, he was not Ii a hie for the dues of the workmen, 
as claimed ; that he " had unnecessarily been made a 
party and dragged here before the Tribunal." He 
added that he admitted that ho was one of the Manag-
ing Directors of the Company before its liquidation, 
but with the order for liquidation, he ceased to func-
tion as such. 
After hearing the parties, the Tribunal made its 
Award dated l\Iarch 8, 1955. The Tribunal awarded, 
inter alia, compensation under section 25(F)(b) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and directed the Com-
pany to pay compensation, within two months from 
the date the award became enforceable, to such of the 
workmen as had been found entitled to the same. It 
may be noted here that the proceedings before the 
Industrial Tribunal had commenced without the 
necessary sanction of the High Court in the liquida-
tion proceedings, but during the pendency of the 
proceedings, the High Court, by its order dated Decem-
ber 20, 1955, granted leave to the workmen to proceed 
with and continue the proceedings against the Official 
Liquidators of the Company. The Industrial Tribunal, 
therefore. further direetcd that so far as the Liquida-
tors were concPrnt>d, t,he compensation awarded to the 
workmen '' shall be recoverable only out of the assets 
in their hands according to law ;'. So far as the 
auction-purchaser was concerned, the award proceed-
ed to make further directions in these terms : 
"The auction-purchaser, it has 
already been 
noted, purchased the different sections of the business 
with the name " The Great Indian Motor Works " 
free from encumbrances and all outgoings and liabili-
ties (Vide Exts. D and E), and the said purchase was 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
19 
confirmed on 5th July, 1954. 
After the sale was 
z959 
confirmed and before possession was taken by the 
t' 
h 
th L' 
'd t 
t 
. 
t d th 
Great Indian 
auc 10n-purc aser
11
, 
e 
1
1qm a ors ermd1na e 
e Motor Works Ltd., 
employment of a the emp oyees {save an except the 
and Another 
Accountant and one Clerk) by a notice dated 23rd 
v. 
July, 1954, with effect from 24th July, 1954. After Their Employees 
such termination of employment, the auction purchaser 
and Others 
obtained possession on 24th July,11954. At that time 
Sinha]. 
no relationship of employer and employees subsisted. 
In the circumstances the dispute with the auction-
purchaser cannot be considered to be ' industrial dis-
pute' as no relationship of employer and employee 
existed between the auction purchaser and the old 
staff who had been discharged earlier. Hence I agree 
with the learned Advocate of the auction-purchaser 
that the rMerence so far as the auction-purchaser is 
concerned is incompetent. Apart from that, when the 
auction-purchaser purchased the business free from 
encumbrances and all outgoings and liabilities and 
when there is nothing to show that the auction-pur-
chaser undertook at any time to maintain the old staff 
in his service, it cannot be said that his refusal to 
continue the employment of 142 employees was un-
justified. Only when one purchases with all assets and 
liabilities as a going concern, he is bound to continue 
the old employees in service and not otherwise. 
I award accordingly." 
Against the said Award which, in terms, was made 
only against the Liquidators and not against the 
auction-purchaser aforesaid, only one of the two Liqui-
dators, namely, Debendra Lall Dutt, made an applica-
tion to the High Court for necessary directions regard-
ing preferring an appeal. The other Liquidator, Chandy 
Das :Nundy, opposed the said application for leave to 
appeal. The High Court, thereupon, made an order 
on April 30, 1956, refusing leave to the Liquidators to 
prefer an appeal from the said Award, It was in 
those circumstances that the appellants, namely, 
Messrs. Great Indian Motor Works Ltd., represented 
by the Managing Director, K.D. Nundy, as the first 
appellant, and K.D .. N undy, in his capacity as creditor 
a.nd/or contributory of the said Great Indian Motor 
I959 
Great Indian 
Jl,/otor Works Ltd., 
an.d A nothm· 
v. 
Their E1nployces 
and Otltcrs 
Sinha]. 
20 
SUPRE1\1E COUR1' REPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
Works Ltd. (under liquidation) and/or as auction-
purchaser of the Company, as appellant No. 2, filed an 
appeal before the Labour Appellate Tribunal of India, 
on May 3, 11156, impleading the one hundred and forty 
two employees through the Bus Workers' Union, as 
the principal respondents, C.D. N undy and D. L. Dutt, 
the Official Liquidators of the Company, as pro Jonna 
respondents. As a counter-blast, the aforesaid work-
men of the Company' filed their appeal on May 17, 
1956, impleading the Company represented by their 
Managing Directors, C. D. Nundy and K. D- Nundy, 
as the first respondent, the Official Liquidators of the 
Company, D.L. Dutt and C.D. Nundy, as respondents-
second party, K.D. Nundy, the auction-purchaser, as 
respondent-third party and the workmen not repre-
sented by the Bus Workers' Union, as rn~pondents­
fourth party. It is not necessary to set out the 
grounds of appeal in either of the two appeals, in view 
of our decision on the preliminary question of the 
maintainability of the appeal in this Court, as will 
presently appear. 
The Labour Appellate Tribunal disposed of the two 
appeals by its order dated August 1, 1956. The appel-
lants' appeal was dismissed as incompetent in view 
of the provisions of s. 179 of Indian Companies Act, 
1913, re-enacted as s. 457 of the Companies Act, 
1956. The dismissal of the appeal on the ground of 
the appeal not being competent; was based on the 
order of the Calcutta High Court, dated April 30, 1956, 
aforesaid, refusing leave to the Liquidators to prefer 
an appeal. It is noteworthy that the appeal before 
the Appellate Tribunal, was not by the Liquidators 
but by K.D. N undy as Managing Director of the Com-
pany, as also by him in his capacity as the creditor or 
contributory or as the auction-purchaser of the Com-
pany. This aspect of the case has not been dealt with 
by the Tribunal which held that the appeal was not 
maintainable as it was not authorised by the High 
Court. The employees' appeal also was dismissed as 
it was not pressed in view of the fact that the appeal 
by the Company stood dismissed t.s unauthorized. 
lt was against the aforesaid order of the Appellate 
•
•
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
21 
Tribunal, dismissing the appeal in liminc, tlHtt the 
I959 
appellants aforesaid moved this Couet and obtained 
G 
11 d. 
. 
. 
d . l 
. 
l 
f" 
k 
rca 
n ian 
special leave to appeal, an tie mam gronn< o attac , Motor Works Ltd., 
naturally, was that the .Labour Appellate Tribunal was 
and Another 
in error in di1m1is:;ing the appeal as unanthorisecl or as 
v. 
not maintainable. 
Thczr .c:mployees 
I · 
·c 
} 
ll d 
· th fi 
und Otlz11rs 
t IS nu1ru1e;;t t· rnt we are C<L c 
upon, 111 
• e rst 
instance, to decide ,\·hother the Labour .Appellate 
Tribunal had rightly dismissed the appeal in limine ·ou 
the ground that t.110 Liqui<lators had failed to obtain 
the necessary sanctioH of th1:1 Calcutta High Court to 
prefer an a.ppeal fl'Olll the Awtted of the Industrial 
Tribunci.J. If that ur<lcr of Lhe Appellate ~rribunal is 
correct, and if we Jiud that the appellants could not 
have any locn8 .stawli to prefer a.u appeal of their own 
as distinct from that on behalf of the Company, no 
other 4uesi,ion would <trise for determination in this 
case. 
If~ on the other hand, we come to the conclusion 
that that order w11s erroneon::;, at least in respect of 
the ap:1ellant<.;' arpeal, then the appeal will have to be 
remanded to be re-heard L.v the Appellate Tribunal. 
It ha.s been urged on hchalf of the a.ppellants that. 
in view of the provisions of s. 12, read with s. 3, of the 
Industrial Di<iputes 
(Appellate~ T1·ibnnal) Act. (48 t1f 
1950) (which was repealed by Act 36 of 1956), which 
governed t.he making of a.ppe"'ls before the Appellate 
Tribunal, the appea,l to that Tribunal was competent, 
and should have been heard and determined on merit.s. 
The provisions of ss. 3 11.ml 12, which we have to 
construe in this case, are in these tcrnis :-
" 3. The provi;;ions of this Act and of the rnlei:i 
and ordcn; made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anythillg iuconsidt.ent therewith eouta.ined 
in '1.ny other law for the time being ia force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law." 
" 12. 
An appeal under this Act against any 
award or decision of an industrial tribunal may be 
presented to the Appellate Tribunal hy-
(i) any party which is aggrieved by the award or 
decision ; or 
Sinha J. 
22 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
r959 
(ii) the appropriate Government or the Central 
. 
Government, where it is not the appropriate Govern-
M Greawt Inkd•aLn d ment, whether or not such Government is a party to 
otor 
OY S 
t ., th d• 
t ,, 
and Another 
e 
ISpU e . 
. v. 
\Ve h>t ve first to determine whether there is anything 
Their Employees in the Indian Companies Aet, with particular reference 
and Others 
to s. 179 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, (re-
Sinha J. 
enacted as s. 457 of the Companies Act, 1956), that is 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Industrial 
Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950 (which herein-
after will be referred to as "the Act"). If there is 
anything in those provisions of the Companies Act, 
inconsistent with th" provisious of the Act, the latter 
shall prevail. Hence, we have to construe the provi-
sions of s. 12 which specifically deals with appeals. 
That section permits an appeal to be presented to the 
Appellate Tribunal by r,ny party which is aggrieved by 
the a ward (omitting the words not necessary for our 
present purpose). It is the usual statutory provision 
for an appeal, which otherwise would not lie. It does 
not say either in ex press terms or by necessary impli-
cation, that those specific provisions of the Companies 
Act, are abrogated or modified. It does not do away 
with the necessity of the requisite sanction of the Court 
so far as a Liquidator is concerned. Under the provi-
sions of the lndiau Companies Act, the affairs of the 
company under liquidation, are placed in charge of the 
Official Liquidator, and under s. 457, it is only the 
Liquidator who is authorized with the sanction of the 
Court, to institute any suit or other legal proceedings 
in the name and on behalf of the company. Thus, 
there is no inconsistency between the aforesaid provi-
sions of the Act and the Companies Act, which only 
laid down a condition precedent to the filing of an 
appeal, if it has to be, by a Liquidator of a company 
in the process of winding up. It concerns a very 
special case and has no bearing on the general right of 
appeal. 
As, in the instant case, the Court refused the 
necessary sanction to the Liquidators to prefer the 
appeal, no appeal could have been filed on behalf of 
the Company. Hence, in so far as the appeal purported 
to be on behalf of the Compa11y, through the Managing 
• 
• 
" 
-
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
23 
Director aforesaid, it was wholly incompetent. But 
r959 
the appeal was not only by the Company as such, but 
G 
11 d" 
K D N 
d 
h 
d. 
. 
rea 
n ian 
also by the said 
. . 
un y as t e ere itor or contri- Motor Works Ltd., 
butory or auction-purchaser of the Company. So far 
and Another 
as this part of the appeal is concerned, it is clear that 
v. 
only a pa.rty to the Reference aggrieved by the Award Their Employees 
· 
1 
1rnd Others 
could be a party to the appca. K .. D. Nundy was not a 
Party in his c.bpacity as creditor or as contributorv. . 
s· h 1 
. "' a . 
He was impleaded, as already ir-iicated as a party to 
the Reference in his capacity as ;,fie auction-purchaser 
of the business of the Company. So far as that capacity 
is concerned, it is clear from the order of the Tribunal, 
that no award was made against him as such. 
He 
could not, therefore, be said to be a party aggrieved 
by the award, having been exonerated from its terms. 
The Tribunal put this on three main grounds-(1) that 
the auction-purchaser had purchased the business of 
the Company free from all encumbrances, out-goings 
and liabilities, (2) that tho employment of the work-
men had been terminated hy the Liquidators before 
possession of the business was delivered to the auction-
purchaser, and (3) that there was no relationship of 
employer and employees between the auction-purchaser 
and the workmen whose services were so terminated. 
The Tribunal, in that view of the matter, declared 
the Reference to be incompetent in so far as the 
auction-purchaser was concerned. 
Thi;;: order, the 
Tribunal passed at the instance of the auction-
purchaser himself. Th0 auction-purclu1-ser, therefore, 
succeeded in obtaining the order which the Tribunal 
passed, holding that the R<:'forence, so far as he was 
concerned, was incompetent. In view of these facts, 
it must be held that so far as the auction-purchaser is 
concerned, he was not aggrieved by the Award made 
by the Industrial Tribunal. That being so, the provi-
sions of s. 12 of the Act, are not attracted to the appeal 
purported to have been filed by the auction-purchaser. 
It is a little difficult to appreciate why the auction-
purchaser, having succeeded in obtaining the order, set 
out above, in his favour, changed his mind and prefer-
red an appeal which, in the events that had happened, 
was not maintainable. 
1959 
Great Indian 
Motor Works Ltd., 
and A ·not her 
v. 
Their E1nployees 
and Others 
Sinha]. 
1959 
Jt,[ay6. 
''\. 
24 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1960(1)] 
\ 
In our opinion, therefore, the Labour Appellate 
Tribunal was not in error in dismissing the appeal by 
-1111 
the Company and by the auction-purchaser, as in-
competent. It follows, therefore, that we are not con-
cerned with the merits of the appeal. In view of the 
fact that we have not expressed any opinion on the 
merits of the controversy raised in the abortive appeal, 
this dismissal shall be without prejudice to the appel-
lants' rights, if any. The appeal is, accordingly, dis-
missed, but the parties here are directed to bear their 
own costs, in view of the fact that we have not gone 
into the merits of the controversy. 
Appeal clismi8ser.l. 
MESSRS. ISPAHANI LTD. CALCUTTA 
v. 
ISP AHANI EMPLOYEES' UNION 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR and 
K. N. WANCHOO, JJ.) 
. 
Industrial Dispute-Puja Bonus-Implied agreement-Tes/-
Benefits arising out of service with employer's predecessors-Worlmten 
if entitled to. 
The workmen were originally employed by M/s. M.M. Ispahani 
Ltd., which shortly before the partition of India transferred its 
registered office from CO:Icutta to Chittagong. The appellant 
company was incorporated on September 15, 1947 and took over 
the good-will and trading rights of M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. and 
also purchased its stock-in-trade, properties and assets. 
Most of 
the shares of the appellant were held by M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. 
and the business of the appellant was of the same nature carried 
on in the same premises with the san1e workmen on the same 
remuneration. On the transfer of M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. to 
Chittagong the question arose of retrenching those workmen who 
were not willing to go to Chittagong and when the appellant 
company came into existence it agreed to employ those workmen. 
The workmen apparently agreed to the termination of their 
services with M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd., and after receiving their 
provident funds and arrears of salaries they were appointed by 
the appellant. M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. used to pay puja bonus 
to the workmen at the rate of one month's wages and the appellant 
also paid the same from 1948 up to 1952, even in the years in 
which the appellant suffered losses. As the appellant did not 
pay puja bonus for 1953, a dispute arose and was referred for 
• 
• 
• 
