1959 
Great Indian 
Motor Works Ltd., 
and A ·not her 
v. 
Their E1nployees 
and Others 
Sinha]. 
1959 
Jt,[ay6. 
''\. 
24 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1960(1)] 
\ 
In our opinion, therefore, the Labour Appellate 
Tribunal was not in error in dismissing the appeal by 
-1111 
the Company and by the auction-purchaser, as in-
competent. It follows, therefore, that we are not con-
cerned with the merits of the appeal. In view of the 
fact that we have not expressed any opinion on the 
merits of the controversy raised in the abortive appeal, 
this dismissal shall be without prejudice to the appel-
lants' rights, if any. The appeal is, accordingly, dis-
missed, but the parties here are directed to bear their 
own costs, in view of the fact that we have not gone 
into the merits of the controversy. 
Appeal clismi8ser.l. 
MESSRS. ISPAHANI LTD. CALCUTTA 
v. 
ISP AHANI EMPLOYEES' UNION 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR and 
K. N. WANCHOO, JJ.) 
. 
Industrial Dispute-Puja Bonus-Implied agreement-Tes/-
Benefits arising out of service with employer's predecessors-Worlmten 
if entitled to. 
The workmen were originally employed by M/s. M.M. Ispahani 
Ltd., which shortly before the partition of India transferred its 
registered office from CO:Icutta to Chittagong. The appellant 
company was incorporated on September 15, 1947 and took over 
the good-will and trading rights of M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. and 
also purchased its stock-in-trade, properties and assets. 
Most of 
the shares of the appellant were held by M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. 
and the business of the appellant was of the same nature carried 
on in the same premises with the san1e workmen on the same 
remuneration. On the transfer of M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. to 
Chittagong the question arose of retrenching those workmen who 
were not willing to go to Chittagong and when the appellant 
company came into existence it agreed to employ those workmen. 
The workmen apparently agreed to the termination of their 
services with M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd., and after receiving their 
provident funds and arrears of salaries they were appointed by 
the appellant. M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. used to pay puja bonus 
to the workmen at the rate of one month's wages and the appellant 
also paid the same from 1948 up to 1952, even in the years in 
which the appellant suffered losses. As the appellant did not 
pay puja bonus for 1953, a dispute arose and was referred for 
• 
• 
• 
~ 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
25 
• 
adjudication. The workmen also claimed benefits from the 
appellant for the period of service rendered by them under 
M/s. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. 
Held, that the workmen were entitled to the puja bonus 
equal to one month's wages as it was an implied term of the 
employment of the workmen. Puja was a special festival in Bengal 
and it had become usual with many firms there to give bonus 
before Puja to their workmen. A claim for puja bonus was based 
either on implied agreement or on customary payment. 
An 
implied agreement could be inferred if the following circumstances 
were established:-
(i) that the payment was unbroken ; 
(ii) that the payment had been made for a sufficiently long 
period ; anci 
(iii) that it was not paid out of bounty. 
The payment need not necessarily be at a uniform rate 
throughout, and it was for the Tribunal to decide the quantum in 
a particular year taking into account the various payments made 
in previous years. '. 
In the present1case the payment was unbroken and was not 
made out of bounty as it was made even in years of loss. 
The 
sufficiency of the length of the period depended on the circum-
stances of each case and in the present case the appellant had 
paid the bonus since its birth. 
Mahalaxmi Cotton Mills Ltd., Calcutta v. Mahalaxmi Cotton 
Mills Workers' Union, 1953 L.A.C. 370 approved. 
Held further, that the workmen were not entitled to any 
benefits arising out of their employment with M/s. M. M. Ispahani 
Ltd. 
The workmen had agreed :o the termination of their service 
with that company, and there was no express or implied under-
taking given by the appellant regarding continuity of service 
when employing the workmen. 
CIVIL 
APPELLATE 
JURISDICTION: Civil Appeals 
Nos. 473 & 474 of 1957. 
Appeals by special leave from the judgment and 
order dated the 27th July 1955 of the Labour Appel-
late Tribunal of India at Calcutta in Appeal No. 
Cal. 257 of 1954. 
M. 
C. • Setalva<1, 
Attorney-General 
for 
India 
(M/s. J. B. Dadachanji, S. N. Andley and Rameshwar 
Nath, Advocate of Mfs. Rajinder Narain & Co., with 
him) for the appella~ts. 
S. K. Mukherjee and P. K. Ghosh for the respon. 
dents. 
4 
I959 
I spahani Ltd., 
Calcutta 
v. 
l<pahani 
Employees' Union 
Wanchoo .f. 
I959 
I spahani Ltd,. 
Calcutta 
v. 
Ispahani 
E1nployees' Union 
Wanchoo j. 
~ 
26 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
1959. May 6. 
The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by. 
WANCHOO J.-These are two connected appeals by 
special leave against the decision of the Labour 
Appellate Tribunal in an industrial matter. Appeal 
No. 473 is by Messrs. Ispahani Ltd. (hereinafter called 
the company) and appeal No. 4'.74 is by the employees 
of the company represented by Ispahani Employees' 
Union (hereinafter called the workmen). They will 
be disposed of by one judgment. 
There was a dispute between the company and its 
workmen on a number of matters, which was referred 
by the Government of West Bengal to the adjudica-
tion of the Second Industrial Tribunal, by an order of 
December 17, 1953. 
There were a number of matters 
which had to be adjudicated upon ; but of these only 
two now survive, namely-
(!) whether the workmen are entitled to puja 
bonus for 1953, and 
(2) whether the workmen are entit.led to receive 
from the company any benefits for the period of 
service rendered by them under Messrs. llf. M. 
Ispahani Ltd. 
A few facts may be set out here to give the back-
ground of this dispute. Originally, there was another 
company called Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. which was 
carrying on business in Calcutta since December 1934 
before the partition of India. Shortly before the parti-
tion took place, Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. trans-
ferred their registered head office from Calcutta to 
Chittagong, now in Pakistan. That company thus 
became a Pakistani company after August 1947. It, 
however, continued to own properties in India and 
carried on some business in Calcutta on a small scale. 
The company was incorporated on September 15, 1947 
and took over the good-will and trading rights of 
Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. and also purchased the 
stock-in-trade, properties and assets of that company. 
Most of the shares of the company were, however, held 
by Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. and the business of the 
company was of the same nature and was carried on 
in the same premises with the same telegraphic address 
•
•
r 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
27 
and with the same workmen on thll same remunera-
tion. Further, the company continued to pay puja 
bonus at the rate of one month's wages from 1948 up 
to 1952. 
As no bonus was paid in 1953, a dispute 
arose between the company and the workmen, which 
was referred for adjudication along with other matters. 
The Industrial Tribunal held that it had not been 
established that puja bonus had been paid at the 
uniform rate of one month's wages for a sufficiently 
long time and for unbroken period, and therefore 
rejected the claim for puja bouns for 1953. On the 
other question relating to whether the workmen were 
entitled to receive from the company any benefits for 
the period of service rendered by them under Messrs. 
M. 1\1. Ispahani Ltd., it held that the workmen were 
entitled to take into account the service rendered by 
them under Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. in the matter 
of benefits due under the law during their service under 
the company. 
This award led to two appeals, one by the company 
on the question of benefits arising from the service 
rendered under Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd., and the 
other by the workmen with respect to puja bonus for 
the year 1953. The Labour Appellate Tribunal allowed 
both the appeals. It held on the question of bonus 
that it had been proved that puja bonus had become a 
term of employment and the workmen were therefore 
entitled to bonus at the rate of one month's wages for 
the year 1953. As to the benefits arising out of the 
service rendered by the workmen under Messrs. M. M. 
Ispahani Ltd., it held that there was termination of 
employment of the workmen when Messrs. M. M. 
Ispahani migrated to Pakistan and the employment of 
the workmen by the company was fresh employment 
and they therefore were not entitled to any benefits 
arising out of their employment under Messrs. M. M. 
Ispahani Ltd. Both the company and workmen applied 
for special leave to appeal to this Court against the 
decision of the Appellate Tribunal insofar as it was 
against them. The applications were granted; and that 
is how the matter has come up before us. 
I959 
Jspahani Lid., 
Calcutla 
v. 
lspahani 
Employees' Union 
Wanchoo ]. 
28 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)~ 
'959 
We shall first take up the appeal of the company 
relating to pui·a bonus for the year 1953. 
Two points 
Ispahani Ltd .• 
Calcutta 
have been urged in this behalf, namely-
v. 
(1) the Appellate Tribunal had no jurisdiction to 
1.>pah~ni . 
interfere with the finding of the Industrial Tribunal as 
Employm Umon it was a finding of fact ; and 
wanchoo J. 
(2) even ifthe Appellate Tribunal had jurisdiction, 
its decision is incorrect in law. 
Puja is a special festival in Bengal and it has become 
usual with many firms there to give bonus before puja 
to their workmen. 
This matter came up before the 
Appellate Tribunal in Jtlahalaxmi Cotton Mills Ltd., 
Cafoutta v. Mahalaxmi Cotton Mills Worlcers' Union.(1 ) 
In that case puja bonus was claimed as a matter of 
right payable by the employer at a special season of 
the year, namely, at the time of the annual Durga 
Puja. '!'his right was not based on the general princi-
ple that labour and capital should share the surplus 
profits available after meeting prior charges. It was 
held in that case that this right rested on an agreement 
between the employer and the employees, and that the 
agreement might be either express or implied. Where 
the agreement was not express, circumstances might 
lead the tribunal to an inference of implied agreement. 
The following cireumstances were laid down in that 
case as material for inferring an implied agreement:-
(1) The payment must be unbroken: 
(2) lt must be for a sufficiently loug period; and 
(3) The circumstances in which payment was 
made should be such as tu oxdude that it was paid out 
of bounty. 
The Appellate Tribunal further pointed out that it was 
not possible to lay clown in tcrnrn wlmt should be the 
length of period to justify the inference of implie<l 
agreement and that that would depend upon the cir-
cumstances of each case. It also pointed out that the 
fact of payment in a year of loss would he an impor-
tant factor in excluding the hypothesis that the 
payment was out of bounty and in coming to the 
conclusion that it was as a matter of obligation based 
(1) 1952 L.A. C. 370. 
•
/ 
" 
'• 
I 
I 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
29 
on implied agreement. As to the quantum of bonus it 
r959 
was laid down that even if payment was not at a 
Ispahani Ltd., 
uniform rate throughout the period, the implied agree-
Calcutta 
ment to pay something could be inferred and it would 
v. 
be for the tribunal to decide what was the reasonable 
Ispahani 
amount to be paid as puja bonus. The tests laid down Employees' Union 
in that case have since been followed in a number of 
-
Wanchoo ]. 
cases by the Industrial Tribunals and the Labour 
Appellate Tribunal. \Ve do not think it necessary to 
refer to all those cases. It may now be taken as well 
settled that puja bonus in Bengal stands on a different 
footing from the profit bonus based on the Full Bench 
formula evolved in The M illowners' Association, Bombay 
v. The Rashtriya .Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay (1). The 
claim for puja bonus in Bengal is based on either of 
two grounds. It may either be a matter of implied 
agreement between employers and employees creating 
a term of employment for payment of puja bonus, or 
(secondly) even though no implied agreement can be 
inferred it may be payable as a customary bonus. In 
the present case we are concerned with the first cate-
gory, (namely, that based on an implied agreement 
creating a term of employment between the employer 
and the employees), and so we shall confine ourselves 
to that category. It was this kind of bonus which was 
considered by the Appellate Tribunal in Mahalaxmi 
Cotton Mills case (2). 
We are of opinion that the tests 
laid down in that case for inferring that there was an 
.implied agreement for grant of such a bonus are 
correct and it is necessary that they should all be 
satisfied before bonus of this type can be granted. 
This brings us to the two questions raised on behalf 
of the company, as set out above. 
The first question, 
(namely, that the Appellate 'rribunal had no jurisdic-
tion to interfere with the finding of the Industrial 
Tribunal that begin a question of fact) can be easily 
disposed of. 
We are of opinion that the decision 
whether there is an implied term of employment is a 
mixed question of fact and law and not a pure ques-
tion of fact. 
This is similar to the decision, for 
example, on a question whether a custom has been 
(1) i950 L.L.J. 1247 
(2) 1952 L.A.C. 370 
30 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
z959 
established or whether adverse possession has been 
Proved, or whether a Hindu family has ceased to be 
Ispahani Led., 
Calcutta 
joint as a matter of law accepting the facts proved. 
v. 
The Appellate Tribunal will therefore have jurisdiction 
Ispahani 
to consider whether on the facts proved before the 
Employees' Union Industrial Tribunal an inference in law can be drawn 
that an implied term of employment for grant of 
Wanchoo ]. 
puja bonus has been established. The Appellate 
Tribunal therefore had jurisdiction to consider this 
matter. 
The next question is whether in law the decision of 
the Appellate Tribunal drawing the inference of an 
implied term of employment in this case is correct. 
The undisputed facts here are these : The workmen 
when they were in the employ ofMessIB. M.M. Ispahani 
Ltd. always used to get puja bonus at the rate of one 
month's wages. This was asserted by the workmen in 
their written statement and the company did not deny 
it in its reply. All that it said was that the practice or 
custom prevalent at the time of Messrs. M.M. Ispahani 
Ltd. and the payment of bonus by that company were 
immaterial and did not bind the company. This aver-
ment impliedly admitted that Messrs. M. M. Ispahani 
Ltd. used to pay puja bonus as alleged by the respon-
dents. The company practically took over the business 
from Messrs. M.M. lspahani Ltd. and it was found that 
it had been paying bonus ever since it came into exis-
tence from 1948 right up to 1952 without any break 
attherate of one month's wages and that this bonus was 
paid even in the years in which the company suffered 
loss. In the circumstances, it was established in this 
case that (1) the payment was unbroken and (2) it was 
not paid out of bounty due to profits having arisen, 
for it was paid in some years of loss also. The only 
other question that remains is whether it had been paid 
for a sufficiently long period in order to justify the 
inference that it was an implied term of employment. 
The length of the period depends on the circumstances 
of each case and what may be a short period not 
justifying an inference of an implied term of employ-
ment in one case may be long enough in another. In 
the present case, sin<:e the appellant has paid the bonus 
•' 
.. 
.. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
31 
continuously since its birth, we agree with the Appel-
late Tribunal that the circumstances justify the 
inference of an implied term of employment for pay-
ment of puja bonus at the rate of one month's wages 
every year. The appeal of the company must there-
fore fail. 
Turning now to the appeal of the workmen on the 
question of benefits, we are of opinion that the decision 
of the Appellate Tribunal on this question also is 
correct. It is true that the company practically took 
over the business of Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. But, 
as pointed out by the Appellate Tribunal, when 
Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd. transferred their head-
office from Calcutta to Chittagong, the question arose 
of retrenching those employees who were not willing 
to go to Chittagong in view of the expected partition 
of India. In these circumstances, the company, when 
it came into existence in September 1947, agreed to 
employ those employees of Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd., 
whose services were likely to be terminated. These 
employees apparently agreed to the termination of 
their services with Messrs. M. M. Ispahani Ltd., and 
therefore obtained settlement of their claims for 
provident fund, and also received all arrears of salary 
from them. They were thereafter appointed, after 
withdrawal of their provident fund, by the company. 
There was no express or implied undertaking given by 
the company regarding continuity of service and the 
employees joined the provident fund of the company 
afresh. In the circumstances the decision of the 
Appellate Tribunal on this question is correct, and the 
appeal of the workmen must also fail. 
We therefore dismiss both the appeals and in con-
sequence order the parties to bear their own costs of 
this Court. 
Appeals dismissed . 
I959 
I spahani Ltd. 
Calcutta 
v. 
Ispahani 
Employees' Unio11 
Wanchoo] 
