I959 
May6. 
32 
SUPREME COUI~T REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
PHULBARI TEA ESTATE 
v. 
ITS WORKMEN 
(B. P. SINHA, P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR and 
K. N. w ANCHOO, JJ.) 
Industrial Dispute-Tribunal-Question of competency-When 
can be raised-Dismissal of u1orkmen on enqu£ry-Rule of natural 
justice-Defect in procedure, if curable -Industrial Disputes Act 
(I4 of r947), s. 7. 
Two workmen Das and another were arrested by the police 
on the complaint of the appellant company for an alleged theft. 
The manager held an enquiry and dismissed Das from service for 
gross misconduct. 
At the enquiry, Das stated that he had nothing to say and 
knew nothing about the theft. Certain persons whose statements 
had been recorded by the manager at the investigation stage in 
the absence of Das, were present at the said enquiry. Das was 
told to ask those persons what they had to say, though he was 
neither supplied with the copies of the statements made by them 
nor the statements were read over to him at the time of the 
enquiry. Das replied that he would not put any questions to 
them. Thereupon these witnesses were asked whether the evid-
ence they had given before the manager was correct, and if not, 
they were at liberty to amend it, to which they replied that the 
evidence they had given was correct. 
Some time later, the Magistrate on the final report of the 
police discharged Das. Thereafter the Union had the matter 
referred to the Tribunal. 
Before the Tribunal the company pro-
duced only the statements of the witnesses but did not produce 
the witnesses themselves. The Tribunal found in favour of the 
workman. 
The co1npany came up in appeal by special leave to 
the Supreme Court, where, for the first time it raised the ques-
tion of the qualification and competency of the one member 
Tribunal under s. 7 of the Act. 
Held, that the question whether the Tribunal was a compe-
tent one under s. 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, prior to 
the amending Act 36 of 1956, must be raised before the Tribunal 
itself as it was a matter of investigation and could not be raised 
for the first time before the Supreme Court. 
Held further, that the basic principle of natural justice in an 
enquiry was that the opponent must be given the opportunity of 
questjoning the witnesses after knowing in full what they had to 
state against him. 
The witnesses on whom the party relied 
should generally be examined in the presence of the opponent 
and he must also be informed about the material sought to be 
used against him, and given an opportunity to explain it. 
. ' 
... 
-
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORT8 
33 
Union of India v. T. R. Varma r1958l S.C.R. 499, followed. 
x959 
New Prakash Transport Co. Ltd. ,.. ).'cir- S1110arna Transport Phulbari Tea Estate 
Co. Ltd. [1957] S.C.R. 98. referred to. 
v. 
Held, further, that if there was defect in the conduct of thC' 
Its Workn,.n 
enquiry by the employer it could be cured if all the relevant 
evidence including the witnesses who were not examined in the 
presence of the workman were produced before the Tribunal. 
thereby giving the party an opportunity to cross-examine them, 
and leaving it to the Tribnnal to consider tlw evidence and 
decide the case on merits. 
M/s. Sasa M-usa Sugar Worlls (P) Ltd.''· ShobratiKhan C.As. 
~os. 746 & 747 of r957 decided on zg-4-1959, followed. 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
205of1958. 
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and 
order dated October 23, 1956, of the Industrial Tribu-
nal, Assam in Reference No. 16 of 1956. 
M. 0. 8etalvad, Attorney-General for Indio., S. N . 
.Zl!ukherjee and B. N. Ghosh, for the appellant. 
0. B. A.garwala and K. P. G~tpta., for the respon-
dents. 
1959. l.\fay 6. 
The Judgment of the Court was 
delivered by 
WANCHOO J.-This is an appeal by special leave in 
an .industrial matt.er. The appellant is the Phulbari 
Tea Estate (hereinafter called the company). The 
case relates to the dismissal of one workman namely, 
B. N. Das (hereinafter called Das), which had been 
taken up by the Assam Chah Karmchari Sangh, which 
is a registered trade union. A reference was made by 
the Government of Assam on March 8, 1956, to the 
Industrial Tribunal on the question whether the dis-
missal of Das was justified; and if not, whether he 
was entitled to reinstatement with or without com-
pensation or any other relief in lieu thereof. Das was 
dismissed by the company on March 12, 1955. The 
charge against him was that on the night of February 
6/7, 1955, he along with one Samson, also an employee 
of the company, committed theft of two wheels com-
plete with tyres and tubes from the company's lorry, 
5 
W anchoo .f. 
34 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1960(1)] 
'959 
which amounted to gross misconduct under the Stand-
-. -
ing Orders. The case was reported to the police and 
Phulbari Tea Estate Das as well as Samson were arrested. Das remained 
Its w;;knien 
in jail up to February 25, 1955, when he was released 
on bail. 
He reported for duty on February 28 ; but 
Wanchoo J. 
the manager suspended him for ten days from March 1. 
Thereafter, he was served with a charge-sheet on 
March 10, 1955, asking him to show cause why he 
should not be dismissed for gross misconduct as men-
tioned above. He gave a reply on March 11, that as 
the case was sub judice in the criminal court, the 
question of dismissal did not arise at that stage and 
the allegations against him would have to be proved 
in the court. On March 12, the manager held an 
enquiry, which was followed by dismissal, on that very 
day. We shall mention later in detail what happened 
at the enquiry, as that is the main point which requires 
consideration in this appeal. To continue the nar-
rative, however, the police submitted a final report and 
the magistrate discharged Das on March 23, 1955. 
Thereafter, his case was taken up by the union and 
eventually reference was made to the Tribunal on 
March 8, 1956. The Tribunal came to the conclusion 
that the dismissal of Das was not justified on the 
ground of proper procedure not having been followed 
and also for want of legal evidence. It went on to 
say that normally Das would have been entitled to 
reinstatement but in the peculiar circumstances of this 
case it was of opinion that he should be granted the 
alternative relief for compensation. Consequently, it 
ordered that Das would be entitled to his pay and 
allowances from February 28, to March 11, 1955 and 
full pay and allowances from March 12, till the date of 
payment. It also ordered that he would be entitled 
to fifteen day's pay for every completed year of service 
along with all benefits that accrued to him till the date 
of final payment. This award was given on October 
23, 1956, and was in due course published and came 
into force. 
Thereupon, there was an application to 
this Court for special leave to appeal, which was 
granted; and that is how the matter has come up 
before us. 
, 
....
.... 
, . 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
35 
Two points have been urged before us on behalf of 
z959 
the company, namely-
Ph lb 
· T 
E 1 1 
h T 'b 
l 
t t 'b 
l 
u an ea 
s a e 
(1) t e 
r1 una was not a competen 
r1 una 
v. 
under s. 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, No. XIV of 
Its Workmen 
1947 (hereinafter called the Act) as it then stood; and 
(2) the award of the Tribunal is not sustainable 
wa .. choo J. 
in law as it shows as if the Tribunal was sitting in 
appeal on the enquiry held by the company, an<l this 
it was not entitled to do. 
Re. (1) • 
Reference in this case was made on March 8, 1956, 
before the amending Act No. XXXVI of 1956 came 
into force. 
At the relevant time, therefore, s. 7 
of the Act, which provided the qualifications of a 
tribunal, required that where it was one member tri-
bunal, he (a) should be or should have been a Judge 
of a High Court, or (b) should be or should have been 
a district judge, or (c) should be qualified for appoint-
ment as a Judge of a High Court. The contention is 
that Shri Hazarika who wa.s the tribunal in this case, 
was not qualified under this provision. This conten-
tion was not raised before the Tribunal and therefore 
the facts necessary to establish whether Shri Hazarika 
was qualified to be appointed as a tribunal or not were 
not gone into. 
Shri Hazarika, was an Additional 
District & Sessions Judge, Lower Assam Division, at 
the time the reference waa made. Assuming that he was 
not qualified under clause (a) above, he might well 
have bPen qualified under clause (b}, if he had been 
a District Judge elsewhere before he became an Ad-
ditional District Judge in this particular division. 
Further even if he had never been a District Judge, 
he might be qualified for appointment as Judge of a 
High Court. These matters needed investigation and 
were not investigated because this question was not 
raised before the Tribunal. In the circumstance, we 
are not prepared to allow the company to raise this 
question before us for the first time and so we reject 
the contention under this head. 
Re. (2). 
The Tribunal gave two reasons for holding that 
the dismissal was unjustified; 
namely-(1) that 
36 
SUPREME COURT ltEPORTS 
[1960(1)) 
z959 
proper procedure had not been followed, and (2) that 
Ph Iba -:--T E 1 1 legal evidence was wanting. So far as the second 
• 
" 
ea sae 
• 
d h 
. " 
. 
h 
... 
v. 
reason IS concerne , t ere IS .orce m t e critJCism on 
Its Workmen 
behalf of the company that the Tribunal had proceed-
ed as if it was sitting in appeal on the enquiry held 
Wamhoo J. 
by the company. But considering that the Tribunal 
was also of opinion that proper procedure had not 
been followed we have still to see whether that find-
ing of the Tribunal justifies the conclusion at which 
it arrived. We may in this connection set out in 
detail what happened at the enquiry on March 12, 
as appears from the testimony of the manager 
and the documents produced by him before the Tri-
bunal. They show that when the enquiry was held 
on March 12, certain persons, whose statements 
had been recorded by the manager in the absence of 
Das during the course of what may be called investi-
gation by the company were present. The first ques-
tion that Das was asked on that day was whether he 
had anything to say in connection with the disappear-
ance of two lorry wheels and tyres from the garage. 
He replied that he had not.hing to say, adtling that 
he knew nothing about the theft. He was then told 
that the people who hatl given evidence aga.inst him 
were present a.nd he should ask them what they had 
to say. 
He replied that he would put no questions to 
them. Then the witnesses present were asked whe-
ther the evidence they had given before the managei: 
was correct or not ; and if that was not correct, they 
were at liberty to amend it. They all replied that the 
evidence they had given before the manager was 
correct. This was all that had happened at the en-
quiry ou March 12, 
11nd thereafter the orcler of 
dismissal was passed by the manager. The manager's 
testimony shows that the wit.nesses who were present 
at the enquiry were not examined in the presence of 
Das. It also does not. show that copies of the state-
ments made by the witnesses were supplied to Das 
before he was asked to question them. Further his 
evidence does not show that t.he statements which had 
been recorded were read over to Das at the enquiry 
before he was asked to question the witnesses. It is 
-
.. 
.. 
, .. 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
37 
true that the statements which were recorded were 
x959 
Produced on behalf of the company before the Tri- Ph lb -:-T E 
. 
d 
d 
h 
u ari ea 
stat• 
bunal; but the witnesses were not pro uce 
so t at 
v. 
they might be cross-examined even at that stage on 
Its Workmen 
behalf of Das. 
The question is whether in these 
circumstances it can be said that an enquiry as 
Wamhoo J. 
required by principles of natural justice was made in 
this case. 
We may in this connection refer to Union of India 
v. T. R. Varma (1). 
That was a case relating to the 
dismissal of a public ;;ervant and the question was 
whether the enquiry held under Art. 311 of the 
Constitution of India was in accordance with the prin-
ciples of natural justice. This Court, speaking through 
Venkatarama Ayyar J. observed as follows in that 
connection at p. 507 :-
" Stating it broadly and without intending it to 
be exhaustive, it mav be observed that rules of natu-
ral justice require th.~t a party should have the oppor-
tunity •>f a<ldueing all relevant evidence on which he 
relies, that the evidence of the opponent should bC' 
taken in his presence, and tha.t he should be given the 
opportunity of cro::;s,examining the witnesses exa.min-
ed by that party, and that no materials should be 
relied on agairnit him without his being given an 
opportunity of explaining them." 
It will he immediately clear that these principles 
were not followed in the enquiry which took place 
on March 12, inasmuch as the witnesses on which 
the company relied were not examined in the presence 
of Das. It is true that the principles laid down in 
that case are not meant to be exhaustive. In another 
case New Prakf:tsh Transport Co. Ltd. v. New S'uwarna 
Transport Co. Ltd. ("), this Court held that " rule;; of 
natural justice vary \vith the varying con;;titutions of 
statutory bodies and the rules prescribed by the legis-
lature under which they have to act, and the ques-
tion whether in a particular case they have been 
contravened must be judged not by any preconceiv-
ed notion of what they may be but in the light of 
the provisions of the relevant Act". In that case, it 
(I) (1958) S.C.R. 499, 
(~) (1957) S.C.R. 98. 
38 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
[1960(1)] 
z959 
was held that "the reading out of the contents of the 
P 
-:--T E 
police report bv the Chairman at the hearing of the 
hulbari ea 
state 
J 
. 
. 
, 
v. 
appeal was enough comphance with the rules of natu-
Its workmen 
ral justice as there was nothing in the rules requiring 
a copy of it to be furnished to any of the parties." 
Wanehoo J. 
That was, however, a case in which the police officer 
making the report was not required to be cross-
examined; on the other hand, the party concerned was 
informed about the material sought to be used against 
him and was given an opportunity to explain it. The 
narration of facts as to what happened on March 12, 
which we have given above, shows that oven this was 
not done in this case, for there is no evidence that. 
copies of the statements of witnesses who had given 
evidence against Das were supplied to him or even 
that the statements made by the witnesses to the 
manager were read out, in extenso to Das before he 
was asked to question them. In-these circumstances 
one of the basic principles of natural justice in an 
enquiry of this nature was not observed, and, there-
fore, the finding of the Tribunal that proper procedure 
had not been followed is justified and is not open to 
challenge. 
The defect in the conduct of the enquiry could have 
been cured if the company had produced the witnesses 
before the Tribunal and given an opportunity to Das 
to cross-examine them there. In Messrs. Basa Musa 
Sugar Works (Private) Ltd. v. Shobrati Khan (1), we had 
occasion to point out that even where the employer 
did not hold an enquiry before applying under s. 33 of 
the Act for permission to dismiss an employee, he 
could make good the defect by producing all relevant 
evidence which would hare been examined at the 
enquiry, before the tribunal, in which case the tribunal 
would consider the evidence and decide whether per-
mission should be granted or not. The same principle 
would apply in case of adjudication under s. 15 of the 
Act, and if there was defect in the enquiry by the 
employer he could make good that <:J.efect by producing 
necessary evidence before the tribunal. But even that 
was not done in this case, for all that the company did 
(I) c. As. Nos. 746 & 74'1of1957 decided on 29-4-1959. 
.. 
' 
-
.. .. 
I 
• 
S.C.R. 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS 
39 
before the Tribunal was to produce the statements 
x959 
recorded by the manager during what we have called Phulbari Tea Estati 
investigation. This left the matters where they were 
v. 
and Das had never an opport.unity of questioning the 
Its Workmen 
witneRRes after knowing in full what they had stated 
against, him. In these circumstances we are of opinion 
that the fiw.ling of t.he •rrilmnal that the enquiry i11 
this case was uot proper is correct and must Htand. 
'Ve therefore dismiss tlw appeal. 
We should, 
howeYer, like to make it elear tlrnt the order of tlw 
Tribunal fixing grant of compcnsa,tion till the date of 
payment must be taken to be limited to the sum of 
Rs. 11,125, which has been deposited in this Court in 
pursuance of this Court's order of April 22, 1957 and 
Das will not be entitled t.o anything more, as further 
stay of payment was pursuant to the order of this 
Court. In the circumstances we are of opinion that 
the parties should hear their own eosts of thits Court. 
Appeal dismis8ed. 
THE I.ORD KRISHNA SUGAR MILV3 LTD., 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
THE UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTH"ll~R 
(and connected petition) 
(B. l:'. SINHA, .J AFER IMAM, ,J. L. KAP(TR, A. K. SARKAR, 
SUH"HA RAO AND M. HIDAYATULLAH, ,TJ.) 
Constitution--Fundami:ntal Rights-Rcsirictions on-Reason-
ableness, relei·anf. considerations for fudging-Enactment obliging 
sugar manufacturers to s11.pply sugar for export ,,f loss-Notijicat-ion 
tinder another enactment increasing price of sugar for internal sale 
for recouping loss--Whether can 
be tulwn into consideration-
Discrimination-Sitgar Export Promotion Act, I958 (30 of I958), 
ss. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9-Constifation of India, Arts. I4 and I9-
Essential Commodities Act, I955 (IO of I955), s. 3--Sugar (Control) 
Wanchoo J. 
1959 
May 6. 
, • 
Order, I955. cl. 5· 
The petitioners challenged the constitutionality of the Sugar 
Export Promotion Act, 1958, which was enacted for the purpose 
of exporting sugar with a view to earning foreign exchange. The 
impugned Act imposed the following restrictions on the owners of 
